The Pinnacle Architecture: Reducing the cost of breaking RSA-2048 to 100 000 physical
qubits using quantum LDPC codes
Paul Webster,∗ Lucas Berent, Omprakash Chandra, Evan T. Hockings,
Nouédyn Baspin, Felix Thomsen, Samuel C. Smith, and Lawrence Z. Cohen†

arXiv:2602.11457v2 [quant-ph] 5 May 2026

Iceberg Quantum, Sydney
The realisation of utility-scale quantum computing inextricably depends on the design of practical, lowoverhead fault-tolerant architectures. We introduce the Pinnacle Architecture, which uses quantum low-density
parity check (QLDPC) codes to allow for universal, fault-tolerant quantum computation with a spacetime
overhead significantly smaller than that of any competing architecture. With this architecture, we show that
2048-bit RSA integers can be factored with fewer than one hundred thousand physical qubits, given a physical
error rate of 10−3 , code cycle time of 1 µs and a reaction time of 10 µs. We thereby demonstrate the feasibility
of utility-scale quantum computing with an order of magnitude fewer physical qubits than has previously been
believed necessary.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Quantum computers offer the promise of efficient solutions to currently intractable problems with the potential
to allow breakthroughs in areas such as cryptography [1],
materials science and chemistry [2]. However, due to the
precision required and the significant levels of noise that
afflict all engineered quantum systems, this is only possible
if quantum computers are fault tolerant [3]. Fault-tolerant
quantum architectures are therefore a cornerstone of all
efforts to build useful quantum computers.
Sophisticated fault-tolerant architectures have been developed based on the surface code [4–8]. However, these
suffer from a very high overhead, since they require hundreds or thousands of physical qubits to encode a single
logical qubit with a low enough failure rate to allow utilityscale computations. As a result, utility-scale quantum computers based on such architectures are expected to require
at least one million physical qubits [8, 9]. Scaling quantum
hardware to this size poses formidable challenges [9]. Developing fault-tolerant quantum architectures with lower
overhead is therefore of the utmost importance.
To meet this goal, we introduce the Pinnacle Architecture. This architecture achieves substantial spacetime reductions compared with prior state-of-the-art architectures [8, 10] by reducing the space overhead relative to surface code architectures without a commensurate increase
in time overhead. We realise these savings through the use
of processing units constructed from bridged QLDPC code
blocks equipped with modular, efficient gadgets for performing gates by generalised surgery [11]. We also introduce a new component—the magic engine—which exploits
the multiple logical qubits of QLDPC codes to simultaneously support magic state distillation and injection in
a single code block, allowing for constant throughput of
high-fidelity magic states with low overhead. Moreover, we
use the technique of Clifford frame cleaning [12] to develop

∗ paul@iceberg-quantum.com

† larry@iceberg-quantum.com

a method for efficient parallelism of operations across processing units. In particular, this allows for parallel access to
a quantum memory that can allow for spacetime overhead
reductions by enabling algorithms to be parallelised by
duplicating processing units while keeping only a single
memory. Scalability and hardware-compatibility is also
ensured through a modular structure which ensures that
connectivity between physical qubits is only required on a
length scale constant in the number of logical qubits. We
summarise the main features of the architecture in Section II A and, after reviewing relevant background concepts
in Section III, we then provide a full presentation of the
general architecture Section IV, and a specific instantiation
in Section V.
We benchmark the performance of the Pinnacle Architecture by presenting a compilation to a standard application: factoring 2048-bit RSA integers [7, 8]. With standard
hardware assumptions (i.e., a physical error rate of 10−3 ,
code cycle time of 1 µs and reaction time of 10 µs), we
show that factoring can be achieved with fewer than one
hundred thousand physical qubits. This outperforms the
previous best result by an order of magnitude [8]. We further show the broad applicability of the architecture by
showing that it allows for classically intractable instances
of the problem of determining the ground-state energy
of the Fermi-Hubbard model to be achieved with tens of
thousands of physical qubits, under the same assumptions.
Again, this amounts to an order-of-magnitude improvement on the best prior end-to-end resource estimates [13].
In addition to these results, we also apply our compilations under alternative hardware assumptions to provide
optimised resource estimates applicable across a range of
hardware platforms. We summarise these results in Section II B and present further details in Section VI.
Through the Pinnacle Architecture, we thus open the
door to utility-scale quantum computing on one hundred
thousand physical qubit devices. This has the potential to
significantly accelerate the timescale for commercialised
and impactful quantum computers.

2
II.

SUMMARY OF CONTRIBUTIONS
A.

Pinnacle Architecture

The Pinnacle Architecture consists of:
• Processing Units consisting of bridged processing
blocks each constructed from a QLDPC code block
with an ancillary measurement gadget system [11].
An arbitrary logical Pauli product measurement can
be performed on the logical qubits of the unit in each
logical cycle.
• Magic Engines consisting of a QLDPC code block
along with ancillary systems for injecting noisy
magic states. In each logical cycle, the magic engine
stores a high-fidelity magic state as it is injected
into a processing unit in parallel with hosting magic
state distillation to prepare a high-fidelity magic
state for the next logical cycle. It thereby provides a
high-fidelity magic state per logical cycle for each
processing unit to allow for universal quantum computing.
• Memory included as an optional component that
allows for especially low overhead quantum storage
in code blocks, which can be accessed by processing
units via ports.
Figure 1 shows how the Pinnacle Architecture is assembled
from these modules.
Compilation is performed via Pauli-based computation [14]. This allows for universal fault-tolerant quantum
computing on arbitrarily many logical qubits with a time
cost that scales with the T count.
Features of the Pinnacle Architecture include:
• Low Spacetime Overhead: The use of QLDPC codes
allows order-of-magnitude reductions in physical
qubit number compared with surface code architectures. This is achieved without the corresponding
increase in time overhead of the previous state-ofthe-art QLDPC code architecture—the bicycle architecture of Ref. [10]–through the use of efficient gadget systems that allow for arbitrary logical Pauli
measurements instead of only a subset of them. It
therefore substantially reduces the total spacetime
overhead compared to previous fault-tolerant architectures.
• Limited Connectivity and Routing: The architecture
requires only interactions between physical qubits
on the scale of a processing block, which is constant
in the number of logical qubits. This means that it
does not depend on all-to-all connectivity but instead is implementable on hardware platforms that
support quasi-local connections between physical
qubits separated by a bounded distance. Moreover,

arbitrary quantum circuits can be performed efficiently using a static configuration of processing
blocks without depending on long-distance routing.
• Modularity and Parallelism: Computations can be
separated across multiple processing units with limited connectivity between them, allowing compatibility with modular hardware. Efficient parallelism
of non-Clifford gates is also supported to supplement
this modular structure. In particular this also allows
parallel, read-only access to memory by multiple
processing units.
The Pinnacle architecture therefore offers a new alternative architecture that is both practical for implementation
on a range of hardware platforms and significantly more
efficient than previous state-of-the-art alternatives.

B.

Results

For concreteness, we present a specific instantiation of
the Pinnacle Architecture using the family of generalised
bicycle codes and the modular, efficient measurement gadgets introduced in Ref. [11]. Based on compilation to this
instantiation, we present resource estimates for two benchmark applications.
First, we consider determination of the ground state
energy of the Fermi-Hubbard model via plaquette Trotterisation [15]. As shown in Fig. 2, we achieve order-ofmagnitude reductions in physical qubit number relative
to the best available end-to-end surface code analysis [13].
For example, we find that at a lattice size of L = 16 (with a
coupling strength of u/τ = 4), only 58 thousand physical
qubits are required at a physical error rate of p = 10−3
and only 20 thousand at p = 10−4 . This compares with 940
thousand and 200 thousand, respectively, in Ref. [13]. We
achieve these results while maintaining a modest runtime
per shot of 1–4 minutes with microsecond code cycle times
or 1–3 days with millisecond code cycle times.
Second, we analyse factoring RSA integers using an algorithm based on that of Ref. [8]. Fig. 3 shows the required
physical qubits and runtime to factor a 2048-bit integer for
different code cycle times and physical error rates. With
standard assumptions of a physical error rate of p = 10−3
and a code cycle time of 1 µs and a 10 µs reaction time (see
Section III for definitions of these timescales), factoring is
possible with fewer than one hundred thousand physical
qubits, compared with the previous best result of close to
one million physical qubits [8]. Moreover, through parallelising the algorithm, we achieve an efficient spacetime
trade-off that allows for low overhead factoring in feasible
runtimes even with longer code cycle times. For example,
with a code cycle time of 1 ms, factoring can be completed
in one month with 2.7 million physical qubits at a physical
error rate of p = 10−4 (typical of trapped ions [16]) or
with 9.5 million physical qubits at a physical error rate of
p = 10−3 (typical of, for example, neutral atoms [17]).

3

(a) Example of the Pinnacle Architecture with one processing unit and approximately one hundred thousand physical qubits.

(b) Example of the Pinnacle Architecture with 81 processing units and approximately one million physical qubits.

FIG. 1. Examples of the Pinnacle Architecture. These two examples represent specific examples of different space-time trade-offs and
code block choices, optimised for RSA-2048 factoring in different hardware regimes. Example (a) allows factoring in one month with a
physical error rate of p = 10−3 and a code cycle time of tc = 1 µs. Example (b) allows factoring in three months with a physical error
rate of p = 10−4 and a code cycle time of tc = 1 ms. Shorter runtimes can be achieved by adding more processing units, increasing
paralellisation at the cost of additional physical qubits.

We therefore conclude that the Pinnacle Architecture
can be used to achieve utility-scale quantum computation
with significantly reduced overhead across multiple applications and a range of hardware regimes.

Physical qubits

106

105

III.

BACKGROUND

In this section we review relevant concepts of faulttolerant quantum computation with QLDPC codes.

104

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

L (Hubbard model lattice size)
Pinnacle, p = 10−3

Pinnacle, p = 10−4

Surface Code, p = 10−3

Surface Code, p = 10−4

FIG. 2. Physical qubits required for determining the ground state
energy of the Fermi-Hubbard model on an L × L lattice to 0.5%
relative precision. Surface code values correspond to the minimum quoted number of physical qubits with u/τ = 4 in Ref. [13].

A.

Code Blocks

A code block is an instantiation of an Jn, k, dK quantum
error-correcting code. Error correction is facilitated by
repeatedly performing a syndrome extraction circuit on
the code block. This circuit involves measuring a set of
parity check operators, which collectively yield an error
syndrome. This is done with the use of nc ancilla qubits;
in each code cycle, each of these is entangled with the
code qubits in accordance with one of the parity check
operators and then destructively measured. A code block

4
108

10 years
1 hour

1 year
1 day

1 month
1 week

1 week

Runtime

Physical qubits

107

1 day

106
1 month

1 hour
1 year

105

10−5

10−6

10−4

10−3

Code cycle time (s)

(a)
108

10 years

1 year

1 hour
1 day

1 month
1 week

Runtime

Physical qubits

107

1 day

106
1 week

1 hour

1 month

1 year

105

10−6

10−5

10−4

10−3

Code cycle time (s)

(b)

FIG. 3. Optimal expected runtime for factoring an RSA-2048 integer on the Pinnacle Architecture as a function of the number of
physical qubits and the code cycle time at physical error rates of (a) p = 10−3 and (b) p = 10−4 . White areas indicate insufficient
physical qubits to implement the algorithm. The reaction time in all cases is assumed to be equal to ten times the code cycle time.

5
therefore requires a total of ncb = n + nc physical qubits.
In order to ensure robustness against measurement errors,
the results of dt = Θ(d) code cycles must be combined
to yield a reliable error syndrome; this is referred to as a
logical cycle.
We assume the use of QLDPC codes [18, 19]. These are
defined by having low parity check operator weights and
qubit degrees (i.e., the number of parity checks supported
on each qubit). Precisely, these check weights and qubit
degrees are bounded by a constant independent of the code
distance. This ensures that syndrome extraction circuits
can have constant depth, and therefore be fault tolerant.
The most widely used QLDPC codes are distance-d (rotated) surface codes [4], which are Jd2 , 1, dK codes with
nc = d2 − 1 parity checks which have weight at most four
and require only nearest-neighbour interactions. Surface
code blocks therefore use 2d2 −1 physical qubits to encode
one logical qubit. However, by relaxing the requirement
of nearest-neighbour interactions, more general QLDPC
codes can allow for many logical qubits to be encoded
in a single code block. This can allow for significant reductions in the overhead of physical qubits required per
logical qubit [19]. The required non-local interactions are
supported on a range of hardware platforms [20–24].

B.

Processing Blocks

To allow for fault-tolerant quantum computation, instead of only passive storage of quantum information, the
concept of a code block must be generalised to a processing
block. A processing block allows for logical operations to
be implemented on its encoded logical qubits.
A QLDPC code block can be turned into a processing
block by appending a measurement gadget system that allows for generalised lattice surgery [25–27]. This construction ensures that the combined code block-gadget system
constituting the processing block remains a QLDPC code,
while also ensuring that measuring a selected Pauli logical
operator of the code is equivalent to the product of a set
of parity check measurements on the gadget system. This
allows for a logical Pauli to be measured in parallel with
error correction within a logical cycle by performing a
modified circuit for syndrome extraction on the full processing block [28]. Arbitrary logical Pauli measurements
can then be performed across multiple processing blocks
by bridging the gadget systems of these blocks [29, 30].
The number of physical qubits in the processing block is
given by npb = ncb + nG + nb , where nG is the number of
physical qubits in the gadget system and nb is the number
of physical qubits used to bridge it to another processing
block.
This processing block construction is underpinned by a
rich history of prior work on generalised lattice surgery.
For brevity, we have here outlined only the most relevant
aspects, but we refer the reader to Ref. [31] (particularly
Sec. 3.2) for a more complete review of this literature.

C.

Pauli-Based Computation

When combined with injected magic states, logical measurements across bridged processing blocks support universal quantum computation on the encoded logical qubits
using Pauli-based computation [14]. Indeed, a quantum
circuit on κ qubits with a T count of τ and any number of Clifford gates can be performed using τ + κ Pauli
measurements and one |T ⟩ state for each of the first τ
measurements [6]. More generally, if the circuit also contains o intermediate Pauli measurements on which later
operations adaptively depend, then the circuit can be performed using τ + κ + o Pauli measurements without any
additional |T ⟩ states. This implies that such a circuit can be
performed fault-tolerantly using ⌈κ/k⌉ Jn, k, dK bridged
processing blocks in τ + κ + o logical cycles.
The compilation which allows for this implementation
follows that presented in Ref. [6]. First, each T gate is replaced by a magic state injection circuit, which requires
one Pauli measurement with support on the processing
block. Then, all Clifford gates are commuted through to
the end of the circuit and absorbed into the final measurement of each of the κ qubits. This is done using the rule
that the Pauli defining the basis of each measurement is
transformed by conjugation by each Clifford that either
passes through it or (in the case of the final measurements)
that it absorbs. By definition, Clifford gates map Pauli operators to Pauli operators under conjugation, so the resulting
circuit consists of τ + κ + o Pauli measurements, along
with a |T ⟩ state for each T gate, as required.

D.

Relevant Timescales

There are three relevant timescales that we use in the
determination of the runtime of a fault-tolerant quantum
circuit. First, there is the code cycle time tc , which is the
time required for the completion of one code cycle (i.e.,
one round of syndrome extraction). This time is hardwaredependent, with typical estimates for different platforms
ranging from 1 µs to 1 ms [17, 23, 32–34]. Second, there
is the logical cycle time tl , which is the time required for
one logical cycle. Since a logical cycle consists of dt code
cycles, this is related to the code cycle time by tl = dt tc .
Finally, there is the reaction time tr [7]. This is defined
as the minimum time between the start of one logical measurement, M and the start of any subsequent measurement
whose basis depends adaptively on the outcome of M . The
reaction time is dependent on the classical control system of the quantum hardware. For simplicity, we assume
throughout that the reaction time is equal to ten times
the code cycle time, i.e., tr = 10tc . Since tc ≥ 1 µs for
all resource estimates we present, this implies that the reaction time always exceeds the conventionally-assumed
minimum value of 10 µs [7]. With this reaction time, our
architecture is not reaction-limited provided that dt ≥ 10
for all code blocks which is true for all resource estimates

6
we present, with one exception addressed that is noted and
addressed in Section V B 2.
IV.

THE PINNACLE ARCHITECTURE

In this section we present the Pinnacle Architecture, a
low-overhead, modular and parallelisable quantum computing architecture based on QLDPC codes. We begin by
presenting the modules that constitute the architecture—
processing units, magic engines and memory—and then
describe the overall operation, structure, and scalability of
the architecture.
A.
1.

Modules

Processing Units

The primary modules of the architecture are processing units. A processing unit uses β processing blocks of
an Jn, k, dK QLDPC code to allow fault-tolerant quantum
computation on κ := βk logical qubits. These processing
blocks can be arranged in a line with bridges connecting
nearest-neighbour blocks. This allows for the measurement of an arbitrary logical Pauli operator, supported on
any or all of the logical qubits in the processing unit, in
each logical cycle.
2.

Magic Engines

To allow for universal computation, we introduce a new
module, which we refer to as a magic engine. A magic engine allows magic states to simultaneously be produced
and consumed to provide a continuous throughput of
magic states to an associated processing unit.
Specifically, each processing unit is equipped with one
magic engine. The magic engine produces one encoded |T̄ ⟩
magic state in each logical cycle, and is also bridged to its
associated processing unit to allow a joint measurement
with that unit in parallel with state production. This is
intended to ensure that in each logical cycle there is a
magic state available for the processing unit to consume
(i.e., the state produced in the previous logical cycle).
A magic engine can be constructed from an Jne , ke , de K
QLDPC code block as follows. Partition the logical qubits
of the code block into two halves, which we label the left
(L) and right (R) logical sectors. In odd-numbered logical
cycles, a magic state is produced by performing a magic
state distillation circuit consisting of a sequence of magic
state injections. These are implemented by joint logical
measurements on the logical qubits of the L logical sector
and small ancilla systems that hold noisy |T ⟩ states. The
result is that the first logical qubit of the L logical sector
is in an encoded |T̄ ⟩ state at the end of the logical cycle.
In parallel, a magic state is consumed from logical sector

states injected

FIG. 4. Structure and operation of a magic engine. Magic state
distillation is applied on one logical sector of a QLDPC code block
using noisy |T ⟩ states injected from ancillary systems. In parallel,
an arbitrary Pauli measurement on the processing unit joint with
Z̄1 on the other logical sector injects an encoded |T̄ ⟩ state that
was distilled in the previous logical cycle.

R by performing a logical measurement of an arbitrary
logical operator on the processing unit joint with Z̄ on
the first logical qubit of R. This allows for the injection
of the |T̄ ⟩ state to perform arbitrary π/8 Pauli rotations
on the processing unit. To complete the injection, an X̄
measurement is also required on the first logical qubit of
R; a change of basis can be performed between logical
cycles to allow that logical qubit to be offline while it is
performed in parallel with the continued operation of the
engine. In even-numbered logical cycles, the roles of the
two logical sectors are swapped.
Since magic state distillation relies on post-selection,
for each logical cycle there is some probability pr that
the state produced by the magic engine is rejected. When
this happens—and if a magic state is required for the next
logical cycle—the processing unit can be left idle for the
next logical cycle to allow for a new magic state to be
prepared. This causes the expected number of logical cycles
required per T gate to increase from 1 to α = (1 − pr )−1 .
The distillation protocol should be chosen such that pr is
small to ensure that this effect is also small.

3.

Memory

The architecture can also include memory. This is optional, but it is useful in cases where a large number of logical qubits must be stored but not processed. It consists of ν
code blocks of an Jnm , km , dm K quantum error-correcting
code encoding µ = νkm logical qubits. Since these logical qubits are not processed, full processing blocks are
not required. However, to facilitate rearrangement of the
memory, we ensure that each code block has nm ancilla
qubits (including those used for syndrome extraction). This

7
means that the memory consists of a total of 2νnm physical
qubits.
Memory is accessed by processing units via ports. To
facilitate this, we partition the logical qubits of the memory into sets of size w, which we refer to as windows. For
simplicity, we enforce the condition that each window is
contained within a single code block; this implies that w
divides km such that there are a total of νkm /w windows.
Each port is associated with one window and consists of
a gadget that allows for arbitrary logical Z-type measurements on the w logical qubits of that window. Bridging a
processing unit to a port then allows for any circuit with
arbitrary gates on the processing unit and controls on the
w logical qubits of the memory window to be implemented
(via Pauli-based computation). This is sufficient to allow
read-only access to that window of memory by the processing unit [35]. More generally, we can assign a port to
any subset of the windows of the memory. Provided the
gadgets constituting each of these ports allow for arbitrary
logical Z measurements to be performed in parallel, this
can allow for up to νkm /w processing units to access the
memory in parallel.
For each processing unit to access the full memory, the
memory code blocks must be permuted. To ensure that
this does not require arbitrary routing, we impose the
constraint that each code block is to be shifted by at most
one position per logical cycle. We may then perform the
required permutation without requiring connectivity on a
longer scale than the size of a code block as follows. The
ν memory code blocks are arranged such that the ith and
(i + 1)th (mod ν) code blocks are adjacent for 1 ≤ i ≤ ν
(e.g., in a loop). A cyclic shift of memory code blocks is
performed by physical SWAPs of the jth data qubit in code
block i with the jth ancilla qubit in code block i+1 (mod ν)
for 1 ≤ i ≤ ν and 1 ≤ j ≤ n, followed by a (local) SWAP
of the jth data qubit and jth ancilla qubit in each code
block. Since such a circuit requires only one layer of nonlocal gates confined to the scale of a code block, whereas
a QLDPC syndrome extraction circuit generally requires
many such gates, we assume that this rearrangement can
be completed during a code cycle and so its time cost is
negligible. By applying ν of these cyclic shifts over a period
of at least ν logical cycles, every window of memory can
be accessed by each processing unit.

B.

Operation

We now consider how the architecture operates while
performing a quantum computation. To aid understanding, we start with a simplified baseline operation (Section IV B 1) and incrementally build up to the most general
operation (Section IV B 4).

1.

Serial Operation

As a baseline, let us first consider a serial mode of operation. In this mode, there is a single processing unit
with κ logical qubits (and, for simplicity, we assume there
is no memory). During each logical cycle, a joint logical
Pauli measurement is performed on the processing unit
and magic engine. In parallel, the magic engine produces
a magic state for the next logical cycle. Accounting for a
magic engine reject rate of pr , this allows for an arbitrary
Clifford+T circuit on κ qubits with a T count of τ and o intermediate measurements to be performed fault-tolerantly
in an average of τ /(1 − pr ) + κ + o logical cycles.

2.

Fully Parallel Operation

As a next step, we can consider the case of implementing a circuit that can be completely separated out into
two or more independent circuits. In this context, we
can separate the architecture up into a separate processing unit for each independent circuit and perform all the
circuits in parallel. This reduces the number of logical
timesteps required from τ /(1 − pr )+ κ + o to approximately maxi τi /(1 − pr ) + κi + oi where τi , κi and oi
denote the number of T gates, logical qubits and intermediate logical measurementsin the ith independent
circuit.

p
This expression omits an O
maxi (τi ) correction arising from variance in the proportion of magic states rejected
in different processing units across the duration of the circuit. Since we are interested in circuits where the T count
is large, we assume this correction is negligible.
An example of where this mode could be used is in
implementing multiple shots of an algorithm in parallel.
In this context, it can be considered a way to use a greater
number of qubits to reduce the runtime compared to when
all shots are performed in series.

3.

Flexibly Parallel Operation

More common and general is the case where a circuit can
be implemented partially in parallel. In such a circuit, no
subset of logical qubits is entirely separable from the rest,
but significant parts of the circuit involve operations on
disjoint registers of logical qubits. A conventional circuit
implementation would allow such parts of the circuit to
be performed in parallel on the disjoint registers. We now
show how this can be done in the Pinnacle Architecture.
Parallelism of this kind is inherently challenging with
Pauli-based computation because of the effect of commuting Clifford gates through to the end. To see this, consider
the case of a Clifford frame at a given point in the circuit
(i.e., the product of Clifford gates up to that point) that
corresponds to an entangling gate between two processing
units. Then, as Cliffords are commuted through the circuit

8
the supports of the logical measurements on one processing unit will spread out to straddle both. In particular, this
means that a logical measurement corresponding to a |T̄ ⟩
state injection—required to perform a T̄ gate on either processing unit—comes to have support on both units. Since
each processing unit only allows one logical measurement
per logical cycle, this implies that a T̄ gate on a logical
qubit on one processing unit cannot be performed in parallel with a T̄ gate acting on a logical qubit of the other
processing unit.
Parallelism therefore requires that the Clifford frame
acts as a tensor product across the units which are to be
parallelised. One way to achieve this (following Ref. [31])
could be to perform CNOT gates that entangle processing
units physically using additional logical measurements, so
that they can be excluded from the Clifford frame. However, this approach leads to a time cost that scales with the
number of CNOT gates, which can quickly cause the benefits of parallelism to be erased. In particular, it performs
poorly in the common setting where one part of the circuit
is highly parallelisable but another is not, since the cost
of parallelising the former part scales with the number of
entangling gates in the latter part.
We instead propose a more flexible alternative that allows for parallelism when it is beneficial but avoids the cost
of physically implementing every CNOT gate. To develop
this approach, we use the technique of Clifford frame cleaning. Precisely, let K be a set of logical qubits and K′ ⊂ K
be a subset of K′ of these logical qubits. If C is a Clifford
frame acting on K, cleaning C off K′ means physically
performing a Clifford U such that CU acts trivially on
K′ . We show in Lemma 1 that this can be done using at
most 4 K′ logical Pauli product measurements on K. We
note that an instance of Clifford frame cleaning was previously introduced in Ref. [12] for the specific purpose of
caching in surface code architectures; the construction we
present is more generally applicable to arbitrary generalised surgery architectures.
Harnessing this tool, our flexible parallelism framework
is as follows. We consider processing units to automatically
be joined into larger units at any point in the circuit where
there is an entangling gate between the units. From that
point on, T̄ gates and logical measurements on any of the
constituent processing units of this joined unit are assumed
to require joint logical Pauli product measurements across
the entire joined unit, meaning that only one such gate can
be implemented on the joined unit per logical timestep. At
any later time, we can then separate a processing unit (with
κ logical qubits) from a joined unit by cleaning the Clifford
frame off the joined unit, at a cost of at most 4κ additional
logical timesteps. From then on, logical measurements on
the separated unit can again be performed in parallel with
the unit it was separated from. This process is shown in
Fig. 5.
This framework allows for processing units to be joined
during parts of a circuit in which many inter-unit gates
occur, but then to be separated again (at a relatively small

(a) Two separate processing units initially operate in parallel.

(b) A point in the circuit is reached where a CNOT
straddles the two processing units, causing the Clifford
frame to become entangling across the units. This joins
the units, requiring all subsequent logical measurements
on either unit to be performed serially.

(c) At any later point, the Clifford frame can be cleaned
by performing up to 4k additional logical measurements
on the joined processing units.

(d) After Clifford frame cleaning is completed, the two processing
units are separated again, allowing parallel measurements to
resume.

FIG. 5. Process of joining and separating processing units with
Clifford frame cleaning to allow for flexible parallelism.

9
cost) for parts of the circuit that are more amenable to
parallelisation. The choice of if and when to separate units
can be specifically optimised for compilation of any particular circuit, with the potential for significant time savings
compared to either a fully serial approach or an approach
that depends on physical implementation of all inter-unit
entangling gates.

4.

General Operation

The final step to our fully general operation is to optionally incorporate the memory. Recall that each processing
unit accesses memory via a port. We allow for read-only
memory access, which requires only gates that act as a control on the port and a target on the processing unit [8, 35].
This means that the access can be provided by using logical
CNOT gates with controls on the logical qubits in a port
and targets on ancillary logical qubits in the processing
unit to fan out memory data onto the processing unit at
the start of the access and fan in at the end of the access.
Since such operations commute, arbitrarily many processing units can access the memory in parallel, provided they
each have ports with measurement gadgets that can be
used in parallel.
Implementing memory access on the Pinnacle Architecture uses the same concepts of joining and separating units
presented in Section IV B 3. Specifically, when a processing
unit accesses a window of the memory, the port associated
with that window is joined onto the processing unit by
the logical CNOTs which implement the fan-out. Since no
entangling gates act within the memory, these ports can
always be assumed to be separate from one another. Moreover, as all gates between a port and processing unit act
as controls on the port, commuting through the Clifford
frame only gives rise to Z-type logical measurements on
the port. When the access is finished, the Clifford frame
is cleaned off the port such that the port can be separated
from the processing unit again. As shown in Lemma 2,
this requires only 2w logical cycles for a port of w qubits.
This ensures that subsequent logical measurements on the
processing unit act trivially on the memory logical qubits,
enabling subsequent access by different processing units.

C.

Scalability

The architecture is designed to ensure that its operation remains feasible at large scale. Specifically, because
the processing units are assembled from individual processing blocks that are all connected via bridges between
nearest neighbours, logical operators with support across
any subset of processing blocks in a processing unit can
be measured using connections between physical qubits
that are restricted to the scale of one processing block.
This means that arbitrarily large processing units supporting arbitrarily many logical qubits can be realised with

physical connections of constant scale. For example, in a
two-dimensional arrangement of qubits, this scale is approximately the square-root of the size of the processing
√
block npb .
This means that the architecture can be supported even
on hardware platforms that only support interactions
whose fidelity decreases continuously with the interaction distance. Moreover, it means that no routing of logical qubits across the architecture is required. Instead, all
changes between logical cycles required to support different logical operations are confined to the scale of a
processing block. As discussed in Section V A, code choice
and gadget design can minimise the dynamism required
even on this scale to be very limited. In summary, the significant overhead reductions supported by QLDPC codes
can be realised with interactions and rewiring confined to
a fixed scale, which can be chosen to be consistent with a
given hardware platform.
The further modularisation of the architecture into processing units provides an additional benefit. Specifically,
feasibility limitations are expected to require large-scale
quantum computers on many hardware platforms to be
assembled from smaller modules [9, 10, 36]. This opens up
an opportunity for hardware and architecture co-design
that can be realised by associating these hardware modules
with processing units of the Pinnacle Architecture. This is
beneficial because it aligns compilation imperatives with
hardware constraints. Gates between hardware modules
should be minimised since they are likely to have poorer
performance than intra-module gates, while gates between
processing units should also be minimised to maximise
parallelism.

D.

Structure

The only constraint on the assembly of the architecture
is that modules that are joined together at any time must be
connected in the architecture. This ensures that these modules can be bridged, and therefore logical measurements
are possible across them, without requiring long-distance
transport. In particular, this means that each processing
unit must be adjacent to its associated magic engine and—if
a memory is present—a port of memory. If a set of processing units is to be joined, these processing units should also
be adjacent to each other.
The structure of the architecture for different example
instantiations is shown in Fig. 1.

V.

INSTANTIATION OF THE ARCHITECTURE

In this section, we present a specific instantiation of the
Pinnacle Architecture using a family of generalised bicycle
(GB) codes, along with numerical simulation results used
to determine the logical error rates that can be achieved
for different of code distances and physical error rates.

10
A.

Setup

GB codes are defined by a lift l ∈ N and sets A, B ⊆
Zl [37]. They have n = 2l physical qubits which can be
divided into two sectors of l physical qubits each, which
we label L and R. The parity check operators of the code
are then
Y
Y
SX,j =
X(j+a),L
X(j+b),R ,
(1)
a∈A

SZ,j =

Y
a∈A

b∈B

Z(j−a),R

Y

Z(j−b),L .

(2)

b∈B

Here, the first subscript on each operator denotes the position of a qubit within the sector and the second denotes the
sector. For any σ ∈ Zl , a cyclic shift of all physical qubits
by σ sites preserves the group of parity check operators,
making it a qubit automorphism.
We construct code blocks from the specific family of
GB codes presented in Ref. [11], which were first discovered in Ref. [38] and subsequently explored in Refs. [39–
41]. These codes have weight-six parity check operators
and require only simple, relatively short-distance transport patterns for syndrome extraction. The code family
is parameterised by an integer m > 3, and defined by
choosing the lift to be l = 2m − 1, as well asPthe sets
a
A and B such that the polynomials A(x) =
a∈A x
P
b
and B(x) =
b∈B x generate the parity check matrices of the classical simplex codes. Classical simplex
codes have parameters [2m − 1, m, 2m−1 ] [42]. We conjecture that there exist choices of A and B such that
the GB codes constructed in this way have parameters
J2(2m − 1), 2m, m + (m − 4)2 K. We present explicit instances for the first five codes in the family in Table I.
For these codes, we empirically find that performance
is improved by allowing for slightly more rounds of syndrome extraction than the code distance. Guided by this
observation, we choose to use dt = d + 2 code cycles per
logical cycle.
The code blocks are extended to processing blocks by
supplementing them with the gadget system presented
in Ref. [11]. This gadget system consists of four gadgets
which correspond to four seed operators chosen such that
all logical Pauli operators are products of cyclic shifts of
the seed operators. In particular, the k logical qubits of
each codes naturally divide into two logical sectors (L
and R) with k/2 logical qubits in each such that one Xtype and one Z-type seed operator suffice for each logical
sector. Constructing, bridging, and shifting four gadgets
capable of measuring each of the seed operators therefore
suffices to measure arbitrary logical Pauli operators on a
code block. This means that only minor alterations are
required to allow the same syndrome extraction circuit to
measure any logical Pauli operator. Four bridges are also
included per processing block; three are used to bridge the
four gadgets within the block, while the fourth is used to
bridge the last gadget of the block to the first gadget of the
next block.

Therefore, letting ng be the number of physical qubits
per gadget and nb be the number of physical qubits per
bridge, and accounting for nc = n check qubits, the total
number of physical qubits per processing block is given by
npb = ncb + 4ng + 4nb .

(3)

The values of these parameters are provided in Table I.
These gadgets can also be used to measure certain sets
of logical operators in parallel (i.e., in a single logical cycle) via the inclusion of duplicate gadgets. Specifically, a
set of m logical operators P1 , . . . Pm can be measured in
parallel by using a different copy of the gadget to measure
each, provided they commute on every physical qubit. This
qubit-wise commutation condition ensures that the check
operators from different gadgets all commute. Connecting
m gadgets to the same code block can increase code check
weights and qubit degrees in places where multiple gadgets are joined to the same qubit or check. In theory, this
increase can be by up to m but, with in an appropriately
chosen basis, it is typically significantly less than this. If
necessary, a small number of ancillary qubits can also be
used to reduce check weights and/or qubit degrees [26, 43].

B.
1.

Modules

Processing Units

Using β processing blocks constructed from the GB code
family introduced above (for any β ∈ N), we can encode
κ = βk logical qubits in βnpb physical qubits. Specifically,
with a code distance of d = 16, we can encode 14β logical
qubits in 860β physical qubits. For better protection, we
can instead use a code distance of d = 24 and encode 16β
logical qubits in 1620β physical qubits.

2.

Magic Engines

We construct each magic engine from code blocks of
the same GB code family as those used for the processing
blocks. These blocks naturally have the required L and R
logical sectors, with k/2 > 5 logical qubits in each sector
when d ≥ 10.
We use 15-to-1 magic state distillation on these code
blocks to produce encoded |T̄ ⟩ magic states [44]. Following Ref. [45], this can be done using fifteen Z-type π/8
rotations, followed by four logical measurements used for
post-selection. Each of the rotations is implemented by injecting a noisy |T ⟩ state from a small ancillary Jna , 1, da K
code. This is done using generalised surgery to perform
a joint measurement (repeated da times) between the L
logical sector of the GB code and the ancillary code. The
noisy |T ⟩ states are prepared using standard techniques (including, if necessary, methods to increase the input state
fidelity, such as zero-level distillation [46, 47] or magic

11
TABLE I. Instances of the family of generalised bicycle codes. For each code, the parameters Jn, k, dK are provided, along with the
number of code cycles per logical cycle, dt = d + 2. The codes are defined by l, A, and B, alongside Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). The remaining
columns show the number of physical qubits in their code blocks, gadgets, bridges and processing blocks. See Ref. [11] for more details.
dt
l
A
B
Code Block Qubits Gadget Qubits Bridge Qubits Processing Block Qubits
(d + 2)
(ncb = 2n)
(ng )
(nb )
(npb = ncb + 4ng + 4nb )
J30, 8, 4K
6
15 {0, 6, 13}
{0, 1, 4}
60
13
7
140
J62, 10, 6K
8
31 {0, 6, 15}
{0, 5, 7}
124
19
11
244
J126, 12, 10K
12
63 {0, 4, 37} {0, 29, 49}
252
31
19
452
J254, 14, 16K
18
127 {0, 32, 100} {0, 28, 49}
508
57
31
860
J510, 16, 24K
26
255 {0, 39, 55} {0, 70, 127}
1020
99
51
1620
Jn, k, dK

state cultivation [48, 49]). Four post-selection measurements (each repeated r times) are then performed in series
on the L logical sector, and the state is rejected if any round
of any of these measurements gives a −1 result.
While in principle the fifteen rotations could be implemented in parallel, in practice it is preferable to split them
into two batches so that at most eight states are injected in
parallel. Accounting also for the measurements required
for injecting the high-fidelity state into the processing unit,
this means that a maximum of ten logical measurements
are required in parallel. Since these operators are fixed, a
basis can be chosen that limits their overlap to ensure that
these measurements do not result in a large increase in
qubit degrees of check weights.
The physical qubits that must be accounted for in this
protocol are GB code block itself (ncb ), gadgets used to
perform up to ten logical measurements in parallel (10ng ),
fifteen ancillary Jna , 1, da K codes (15 × (2na − 1)) with
bridges used to connect these ancillary codes to the GB
code block (15×(2d−1)) and (if necessary) ancillary qubits
(nα ) used to reduce the infidelity of input states (e.g., by
magic state cultivation). The total overhead of the magic
engine is therefore given by
nme = ncb + 10ng + 30(na + da − 1) + nα .

(4)

The parameters of the engine are chosen to achieve a
target output infidelity, pout . Specifically, we choose the
distance of the GB code block, de , to be large enough that
the logical error rate of this block is much smaller than
pout , which ensures that the contribution to the output
infidelity from errors on this code block is negligible. The
probability of an error in one of the Z-type rotations can
then be approximated by prot ≈ pin + (da + 1)pa , where
pin is the error of the noisy |T ⟩ state, pa is the logical error
rate per code cycle of the ancillary code and the coefficient
da + 1 accounts for da rounds of joint measurements with
the GB block and one destructive measurement on the
ancillary code. The probability of an undetected error in
the post-selection measurements is pm = pr . In the 15-to1 distillation scheme, there are thirty-five failure modes
arising from errors in Z-type rotations [45], and a further
six resulting from a rotation error combined with two
errors in the post-selection measurements. The infidelity

of the output state can therefore be approximated by
pout ≈ 35p3rot + 6prot p2m
≈ 35 pin + (da + 1)pa

3


+ 6pr pin + (da + 1)pa
(5)

The reject rate is approximately
pr ≈ 15prot + 4rpm + 4pα

(6)

where pα is the probability that preparation of sufficiently
many noisy |T ⟩ states for the protocol fails (e.g., because
of post-selection in magic state cultivation).
Motivated by the applications of Section VI, we consider
two target output infidelities: pout ≤ 10−9 (suitable for
the Fermi-Hubbard model) and pout ≤ 10−11 (suitable for
RSA-2048 factoring). We also consider two physical error
rates, p = 10−4 and p = 10−3 ; motivated by the results of
Section V C we choose de = 10 and de = 24 respectively
for these error rates. In the case where pout = 10−9 and
p = 10−4 , it is sufficient to use a physical |T ⟩ state (i.e.,
to choose the trivial code where na = da = 1) and r = 1.
Indeed, in this case pin = pa = p = 10−4 so that pout ≈
41(3 × 10−4 )3 = 10−9 . The number of qubits required by
the magic engine is then
nme; 10−4 → 10−9 = 592.

(7)

The reject rate is given by pr ≈ 19p ≈ 0.2%.
For all other cases, we use a version of fold-transversal
cultivation [49]. Specifically, in each case we perform the
injection and cultivation steps in one or more ancillary
systems of 25 qubits per injected state, which each produce
a magic state in no more than eight code cycles. These
states can then be grown into fifteen distance-da rotated
surface codes of required distance da and post-selected to
have an infidelity of pin before injection into the QLDPC
code block. The magic engine reject rate is dominated by
this post-selection in cultivation (i.e., pr ≈ pα ) [50]. For
p = 10−4 and pout = 10−11 , we choose da = 5 (such that
pa = 5 × 10−7 [51]), pin = 5 × 10−5 and r = 1, and
we provision one ancilla system per injected state. The
number of physical qubits required is then:
nme; 10−4 → 10−11 = 1807.

(8)

12
and the estimated reject rate is pr ≈ 2%. For p = 10−3 and
pout = 10−9 , we choose da = 7 (such that pa = 2 × 10−5
[51]), pin = 10−4 and r = 2, and we provision two ancilla
systems per injected state. The number of physical qubits
required is then:
nme; 10−3 → 10−9 = 4410.

(9)

For p = 10−3 and pout = 10−11 , we choose da = 9 (such
that pa = 2 × 10−6 [51]), pin = 5 × 10−5 and r = 2, and
we provision two ancilla systems per injected state. The
number of physical qubits required is then:
nme; 10−3 → 10−9 = 5430.

(10)

For both p = 10−3 cases, the estimated reject rate is pr ≈
10%.
Since the engine is intended to produce a magic state for
each logical cycle, the time, tme , required for distillation
places a lower bound on the logical cycle time of the associated processing unit. The time required for the logical measurements in distillation themselves is (2da + 4r)tc . However, in some cases this scheme can be reaction-limited,
since the post-selection measurement bases depend on the
outcome of the injection measurements. Specifically, we
must allow at least the reaction time of tr = 10tc from the
beginning of the protocol to the first post-selection measurement and from the beginning of the second injection
batch to the second post-selection measurement [52]. This
means the number of code cycles required is:
tme = max{2da tc +4rtc , tr +4rtc , da tc +tr +3rtc } (11)
For the p = 10−3 and p = 10−4 magic engines, we find
that tme ≤ 26tc and tme ≤ 18tc respectively, which ensures that distillation completes within d = 24 and d = 16
GB code logical cycles. This ensures compatibility for the
applications in Section VI without any increase in logical
cycle time, with the sole exception of the Fermi-Hubbard
model with p = 10−4 . In that case, the use of d = 10 processing blocks with the pout = 10−9 magic engine implies
a modest increase in logical cycle time from dt = 12tc
to tme = 14tc code cycles, which is accounted for in the
presented runtimes.
3.

Memory

For the memory, we use the same code blocks as are used
for the processing blocks. For simplicity, we match the
window size with the number of logical qubits in a logical
sector, k/2. Each port then corresponds to one of the Ztype gadgets used in the gadget system of the processing
blocks, along with a bridge to connect to a processing unit.
The logical operators that must be measured to access the
memory commute on every physical qubit and so can be
measured in parallel, as they act across disjoint processing
units and act only as Z-type operators on the memory.
Moreover, since each memory code block has at most two

TABLE II. Fitted parameters with 95% confidence intervals for
the ansatz in Eq. 12 for memory experiments and logical measurement experiments.
Experiment
Memory

A

B

C

+0.0006
+0.09
5.9+1.8
−1.4 0.0179−0.0006 0.50−0.09

+0.0007
+0.09
Log. Meas. 6.2+1.9
−1.4 0.0158−0.0007 0.47−0.09

ports, these measurements increase the check weight and
qubit degree by at most two.
Referring to Table I, the additional number of physical
qubits per port is ng +nb = 88 at d = 16 or ng +nb = 150
at d = 24. Hence, for any ν ∈ N, we can encode 14ν logical
qubits in memory such that ρ processing units can access
it in parallel with 508ν + 88ρ physical qubits at d = 16 or
16ν logical qubits in memory with 1020ν + 150ρ physical
qubits at d = 24.

C.

Simulation Results

To assess the logical error rates achievable with different
code choices, we perform numerical simulations of both
memory and logical measurements by generalised surgery.
These are performed for one logical cycle (dt = d + 2
rounds of syndrome extraction) with standard circuit-level
depolarising noise. For memory experiments we instead
simulated d rounds of syndrome extraction and rescaled
the logical failure rates by (d + 2)/d. Circuits for the memory simulations are constructed as in Ref. [40], while circuits for the surgery simulations are constructed using
integer linear programming [53]. We perform uncorrelated (only X-type detectors) most-likely error decoding
by converting the decoding problem into a mixed integer
program and allow the solver to obtain an optimal solution.
Results of these simulations are shown in Fig. 6.
We assume each point is binomially distributed and use
maximum likelihood estimation to fit the points to the
sub-threshold ansatz

pL,cb (p, d) = A

p
B

 d2 +C
.

(12)

Here pL is the total logical failure rate for all k logical
observables over dt rounds. It follows from this that the
error rate per logical observable and logical cycle is given
by
A
pL (p, k, d) =
k



p
B

 d2 +C
.

(13)

The fitted parameters for the ansatz with 95% confidence
intervals are given in Table II. Table III shows the logical
error rates per logical qubit per logical cycle derived from
this ansatz for each of the GB codes considered at physical
error rates of p = 10−3 and p = 10−4 .

13
VI.

APPLICATIONS

10 1

In this section, we show how the Pinnacle Architecture
can be applied to two applications: determining the ground
state energy of the Fermi-Hubbard model, and factoring
RSA integers.

Logical error rate

10 3

10 5

10 7

A.

10 9

10 11

10 13

3×10 3

2×10 3

5×10 4

1×10 3

Fermi-Hubbard Model

In this subsection, we determine the resources required
to estimate the ground state energy of the two-dimensional
Fermi-Hubbard model using the Pinnacle Architecture.

Physical error rate
d=4

d=6

d=10

d=16

d=24

FIG. 6. Simulation results to determine logical error rates per
processing block (of k logical qubits) per logical cycle of the
Pinnacle Architecture using GB codes of different distances and
across different physical error rates. Solid markers show results
for X-basis memory experiments decoded with most-likely error
decoding. Hollow markers show results for logical measurements
by generalised surgery; data was collected for the d = 4, d = 6
and d = 10 codes at the same physical error rates as for the
memory experiments. Highlighted regions are 99% confidence
intervals for the memory experiment data points. The solid and
dashed lines are fits of the ansatz in Eq. (12) to the memory
experiment data and logical measurement data respectively. We
emphasise that ansatz parameters are independent of distance
(i.e., the same equations are used for all codes), which allows for
extrapolation of the collected data across the code family.

TABLE III. Error rates per logical qubit and logical cycle for logical
measurement in GB codes of each distance at physical error rates
of p = 10−3 and p = 10−4 . Values correspond to the central
estimates of the fit parameters from the Logical Measurement
row of Table II substituted into the ansatz presented in Eq. (13).
p

d=4

d=6

d = 10

d = 16

d = 24

10−3 8 × 10−4 4 × 10−5 1 × 10−7 3 × 10−11 4 × 10−16
10−4 3 × 10−6 1 × 10−8 5 × 10−13 1 × 10−19 1 × 10−28

We emphasise that the purpose of these simulation results is to benchmark the capabilities of the architecture
and guide code distance choice for resource estimation.
This informs the decision to use most-likely error decoding which correctly decodes all faults of weight less than
d/2 and avoids error floors that can arise from alternatives
such as belief propagation decoders [54]. The problem of
developing a sufficiently fast decoder for real-time use
by the classical control system of quantum hardware is
outside the scope of this paper, and we look forward to
addressing it in future work.

1.

Algorithm

The two-dimensional Fermi-Hubbard model represents
a system of interacting fermions and has the Hamiltonian
H = Hh + HI

X X  †
X
=
ai,σ aj,σ + a†j,σ ai,σ + u
n̂i,↑ n̂i,↓ .
i

⟨i,j⟩ σ∈{↑,↓}

(14)
Here, i denotes the sites of an L × L lattice, ⟨i, j⟩ denotes
pairs of nearest neighbours on this lattice, σ ∈ {↑, ↓}
denotes spins states, a† and a represent creation and annihilation operators, respectively, n̂ = a† a denotes the
number operator, and u denotes the (dimensionless) coupling strength.
We follow Ref. [15] in using plaquette Trotterisation to
determine the ground state energy of the Fermi-Hubbard
model with a relative error of 0.5% of the total lattice energy.
In order to minimise the number of qubits required, we
modify this method by omitting Hamming weight phasing
(which requires a system of 1 ≤ α ≤ L2 /2 ancillary
logical qubits), instead simply performing each required
phase rotation in sequence. With this simplification, the
number of logical qubits required is
N = 2L2 + 2.

(15)

This accounts for two logical qubits for each lattice site
(one for each spin state) and two additional logical ancilla
qubits (one for phase estimation and one for repeat until
success synthesis) [15]. From Eq. (F10) of Ref. [15], the T
count for one shot of the algorithm is given by
s
W
τ = 6.203
3 ×
ε(1 − x)




!
√
NR 3W


√
+ 9.2 + NT  .
√
NR 1.15 log2
3
x 1−x ε
(16)

14
Here, NT = 12L2 and NR = 4L2 are the number of T
gates and arbitrary Z rotations (which are each synthesised
from a number of T̄ gates) required per Trotter step. The
number of Trotter steps required for the target precision
is given by the prefactor. In this prefactor, ε = 0.005E0
corresponds to the required relative error of 0.5%, where
the energy per site E0 is estimated at 1.02 hartrees for
u = 4 and 0.74 hartrees for u = 8 [13]. W is a parameter
that bounds the Trotter error; bounds on this parameter
are provided in Ref. [15]. The parameter x reflects a choice
of how to split the error budget across different sources;
we optimise over this in our analysis.
In addition to T gates, the algorithm also requires additional logical measurements. In particular, repeat-untilsuccess synthesis is used to perform each of the NR arbitrary Z rotations in each Trotter step [55, 56][57]. This
method successfully performs the correct rotation with a
probability of at least one half [56], and so the expected
number of attempts per rotation is at most two. Since one
logical measurement is required per attempt (in addition to
the T gates), this adds an average of up to two logical measurements per arbitrary rotation. Logical measurements
are also required for the final phase estimation. However,
since this is only performed once (not for each Trotter
step), it is negligible compared with the T count. We therefore express T —the sum of the T count and number of
logical measurements—as
s
W
T = 6.203
3 ×
ε(1 − x)




!
√
NR 3W


√
+ 11.2 + NT  .
√
NR 1.15 log2
3
x 1−x ε
(17)
This quantity determines the number of logical cycles on
the Pinnacle Architecture. It is approximately constant in
L because the allowed error is relative to the total energy,
which scales as L2 [13].

2.

Implementation and Results

Concretely, we consider the case of even L ≤ 32 and
u = 4. In this regime, N ≤ 2050 and we find numerically
that the number of logical cycles satisfies T = 8 × 106 ,
which also upper bounds the T count. This implies that the
logical spacetime volume satisfies N T ≤ 2 × 1010 . Hence,
the algorithm can be implemented with negligible failure
probability provided the error rate per logical qubit and
logical cycle satisfies pL ≪ 5 × 10−11 and the |T ⟩ state
fidelity satisfies pT ≪ 10−7 . With reference to Table III,
this is satisfied by using the d = 24 GB code instantiation
of the architecture for a physical error rate of p = 10−3
and the d = 10 instantiation for p = 10−4 , along with the
corresponding pout = 10−9 magic engines.

TABLE IV. Physical qubits and runtime required to perform one
shot of Fermi-Hubbard ground state energy estimation on an
L × L lattice with a relative error of ≤ 0.5% of the total lattice
energy. The runtime is approximately independent of L because
the relative error allows for fewer Trotter steps for larger lattices;
runtimes for each value of L are equal to or slightly smaller than
those given. kq represents kiloqubits (×103 qubits).
Physical Qubits
L
p = 10−3 p = 10−4
8
19 kq
5.6 kq
10
25 kq
8.3 kq
12
35 kq
12 kq
14
45 kq
16 kq
16
58 kq
20 kq
18
71 kq
25 kq
20
87 kq
31 kq
22
103 kq
37 kq
24
123 kq
44 kq
26
142 kq
52 kq
28
165 kq
60 kq
30
187 kq
69 kq
32
213 kq
78 kq
Runtime (Upper Bound)
Code Cycle p = 10−3 p = 10−4
1 µs
3.8 min
1.8 min
1 ms
2.6 days 1.3 days

To implement this on the Pinnacle
we use a
 Architecture,

single processing unit with β = N/k processing blocks
to ensure there are κ ≥ N logical qubits available. We also
account for a magic engine for this processing unit, but
do not include memory. The required number of physical
qubits is therefore given by
 
N
n = npb
+ nme .
(18)
k
Substituting N = 2L2 + 2 and the values for npb , nme and
k from Section V B, the numbers of physical qubits required
with physical error rates of p = 10−3 and p = 10−4 ,
respectively, are therefore
&
'
L2 + 1
n10−3 = 1620
+ 4410,
(19)
8
&
'
L2 + 1
n10−4 = 452
+ 1807.
(20)
6
Table IV shows the number of physical qubits required
for even L ≤ 32, along with the runtimes with code cycle
times of 1 µs and 1 ms. Figure 2 shows that the number of
physical qubits required is an order of magnitude smaller
than those required using surface codes in Ref. [13].
A full determination of the ground state energy requires
multiple shots of the algorithm, with the number dependent on the overlap between the initial state and the true
ground state. These shots can be performed in series (with
a proportional increase in run time) or could be performed

in parallel using multiple separate processing units (with
a proportional increase in the required physical qubits).

B.

RSA Factoring

In this subsection, we show that the Pinnacle Architecture can be used to efficiently perform the factoring
necessary to break RSA encryption.

1.

Algorithm

The algorithm we use is a generalisation of that presented by Gidney in Ref. [8], which uses techniques developed by Ekerå and Håstad [58] and by Chevignard et
al. [59]. We refer to this algorithm as Gidney’s algorithm.
This algorithm uses residue number system arithmetic to
replace modular arithmetic over NRSA (the number being
factored) with modular arithmetic over a set of primes
P that each have size polylogarithmic in NRSA . This reduces the number of qubits required for the working register required for modular exponentiation (the dominant
part of the factoring algorithm) from Θ (log NRSA ) to
Θ (log log NRSA ), reducing the space overhead. For each
individual prime, the time overhead for the modular exponentiation is also significantly reduced since the time cost
for arithmetic operations such as addition scales with the
size of the input registers. However, in Gidney’s algorithm,
this does not translate to an overall reduction in runtime
because the |P | primes are processed in series.
We generalise Gidney’s algorithm by allowing for the
possibility of processing multiple primes in parallel. This
is done by adding ρ − 1 additional ancillary working registers, for any positive integer ρ ≤ |P |. The outer loop of
Gidney’s algorithm can then be parallelised across the ρ
working registers, allowing the |P | primes to be processed
in ⌈|P |/ρ⌉ batches. Between computation and uncomputation of each batch, parallel reduction is used to combine
the accumulators of each register onto the accumulator
of the first working register by aggregating accumulators
pairwise in the form a binary tree. This ensures that the
final value of this accumulator matches that of Gidney’s
algorithm, since it simply amounts to a reordering of the
sum used to calculate the approximate modular exponential (Eq. (20) of Ref. [8]), while the other working registers
are fully uncomputed after each batch is processed to ensure that they end in the trivial state. The required result
may therefore be extracted by measurement and classical
processing in the same way. Letting TG be the time cost
for Gidney’s algorithm, our algorithm has a time cost of



|P |
1
T =
TG + O (log ρ) ,
(21)
ρ
|P |
where the O (log ρ) term accounts for cost associated with
combining accumulators. Since |P | is large (e.g., ≈ 2.1 ×

Ratio of Parallelised to Serial Algorithm

15

101

100

10−1

10−2
20

40

60

80

100

Parallelisation Factor, ρ
Logical Qubit Ratio

Logical Spacetime Ratio

Runtime Ratio

FIG. 7. Comparison of space, time and spacetime cost for our
parallelised algorithm to Gidney’s algorithm or Ref. [8]. For the
purpose of this plot, all algorithmic parameters (other than ρ) are
chosen to match those of the n = 2048 row of Table 5 of Ref. [8].

104 for RSA-2048 [8]), this can allow for a reduction in the
time cost by many orders of magnitude.
Importantly, the additional space incurred by this form
of parallelisation is not proportional to the reduction in
time cost. To see why, note that the full register in Gidney’s algorithm has two components — an input register of
m = Θ (log NRSA ) logical qubits and a working register
of Nw = Θ (log log NRSA ) logical qubits used to perform
the approximate modular exponentiation. While the working register must be duplicated to allow for parallelisation,
the same input register can be reused for many primes
as it is only accessed by lookup operations. These operations commute for different primes since they all use only
gates with controls on the input qubits. More precisely,
given that a working register accesses the input register
in windows of w1 logical qubits at a time, pipelining these
accesses can allow ⌈m/w1 ⌉ registers to run in parallel using a single input register. Therefore, the required number
of logical qubits is


ρ
N=
m + ρNw .
(22)
⌈m/w1 ⌉
l
m
ρ
Noting that ⌈m/w
= 1 for ρ ≲ 200 and m is an order
1⌉
of magnitude larger than Nw , this can be significantly
smaller than ρN1 = ρ(m + Nw ) (where N1 is the number
of logical qubits required for Gidney’s algorithm). This
leads to significant spacetime savings from parallelisation,
as shown in Fig. 7.
Our modified algorithm allows for very efficient parallelism, with orders of magnitude reductions in the time
overhead achievable with a smaller increase in the space
overhead. In particular, we note that while Gidney’s algorithm has a longer runtime than the earlier implementation of Gidney and Ekerå [7], our parallelised version can

16
achieve a significantly faster runtime. This motivates our
choice of this algorithm even for architectures with slow
clock cycles, where runtime is especially important.

2.

Implementation on Pinnacle Architecture

To implement the algorithm on the Pinnacle Architecture, we begin by allocating a processing unit for each
working register. These processing units can run in parallel
throughout most of the computation. The only exception
is the relatively short periods when the accumulators of
the working registers are being aggregated; during this
process, Clifford frame cleaning is used following each
pairwise interaction of accumulators to ensure that the
processing units do not remain joined thereafter.
Each of these working registers is equipped with enough
logical qubits to allow implementation of Gidney’s algorithm. This corresponds to: an f logical qubit sub-register
for the overall accumulator; an ℓ + len(m) logical qubit
sub-register on which discrete-log values are accumulated for each prime;two ancillary sub-registers each with
max f, ℓ + len(m) logical qubits; a third ancillary subregister with ℓ logical qubits; and one additional ancillary
logical qubit for compiling Toffoli gates from T gates using
the circuit of Ref. [60]. As in Ref. [8], f is the length of the
truncated accumulator, ℓ is the bit length of the residue
primes and len(m) = ⌊log2 (m)⌋ + 1 is the bit length of
m. We therefore require κ logical qubits, given by
κ = f + 2ℓ + len(m) + 2 max(f, ℓ + len(m)) + 1. (23)
To achieve this, we allocate ⌈κ/k⌉ processing blocks to
each processing unit, where k is the number of logical
qubits per code block.
The input register (or multiple input registers if ρ ≥
⌈m/w1 ⌉) is associated with memory in the architecture.
Access to this memory occurs during loop 1 of Gidney’s
algorithm, when windows of w1 logical qubits are used
as the address for a lookup operation targeted on each
working register. As discussed in Section V B 3, we fix w1 =
k/2, and we also enforce the condition that ℓ ≥ w1 . This
ensures that there are at least w1 unused logical qubits
onto which the window can be fanned out, since at the
time of this loop, f + 3ℓ + 3 len(m) logical qubits of each
working register are in use, meaning that there are at least
ℓ unused logical qubits.
Otherwise, we follow the decomposition into addition,
lookup and phaseup subroutines and implementation of
these subroutines presented in Ref. [8].

3.

Resource Analysis

a. Physical Qubits: We now determine the number
of physical qubits required. Each working register corresponds to a processing unit with κ(f, ℓ, m) logical qubits,

as given in Eq. (23), along with a magic engine. The number of physical qubits required for the ρ working registers
is therefore
!


κ(f, ℓ, m)
nw = ρ npb
+ nme .
(24)
k
Each
memory
stores m logical qubits and there are
l
m
ρ
such memories. Each memory requires ν =
 ⌈m/w1 ⌉
m/k code blocks of an Jn, k, dK code (with 2n physical
qubits each). For each processing unit, we also require a
port with ng + nb additional physical qubits. The number
of physical qubits required for the memory and ports is
therefore

 
ρ
m
nm = 2n
+ ρ(ng + nb ).
(25)
⌈m/w1 ⌉
k
Hence the total number of physical qubits is ntotal = nw +
nm .
b. Runtime: We define the total number of logical
cycles required per iteration of the outer loop of Gidney’s
algorithm to be Σ, which is equal to the sum of the final
column of Table V. We define the number of additional
logical cycles required to combine the accumulators in
each batch of our parallelised version of the algorithm to
be Λ. When ρ = 1, Λ = 0; otherwise, we have:
Λ = 27f ⌈log2 (ρ)⌉ − 4f + 9⌈l/w4 ⌉(2w4 − w4 − 1) (26)
which accounts for the binary tree used to combine accumulators, its uncomputation, Clifford frame cleaning
between pairs of accumulators, and the uncomputation of
loop
4 on

 the ancillary working registers. Since we require
|P |/ρ iterations, this implies that the number

of logical
cycles required for the full outer loop is |P |/ρ (Σ + Λ).
Following the completion of this outer loop, we have
two further minor steps that are performed once. First,
the uncomputation of loop 1 [8]—which is performed in
parallel on all streams—consists of a single instance of the
loop 1 lookup and
it takes
 addition. Referring to Table V,


υ = ⌈m/w1 ⌉ 6 2w1 − w1 + ℓ + len(m) − 2 + 2w1
logical cycles. Second, there is a frequency measurement
(i.e. inverse quantum Fourier transform followed by measurement); the number of logical cycles required for this is
negligible compared to Σ so we follow Ref. [8] in omitting
it from our accounting. Assuming a perfect success rate of
magic engines we can therefore write the total number of
logical cycles as


|P |
T′=
(Σ + Λ) + υ.
(27)
ρ
The proportion of logical cycles requiring T states is approximately (in fact, slightly less than) 2/3, which leads to
an adjusted formula for the true number of logical cycles
accounting for the magic engine rejection rate of pr of


2
1
−1
T =
(1 − pr ) +
T ′.
(28)
3
3

17
Then the total runtime per shot t = tl T is the product of
the number of logical cycles T and the time per logical
cycle tl = dt tc .
The expected number of shots required for the factoring,
from Ref. [8], is given by
s+1

σ=


0.99pS 1 − 2NRSA

q

s+2
2f +1 sw1

,

(29)

where s is the Ekera-Håstad parameter, and pS is the probability that a shot does not have a logical error, which is
given by
NT

pS = (1 − pL )

τ

(1 − pT ) ,

(30)

where pL is the logical error rate per logical qubit per
logical cycle, pT is the infidelity of output T states from
the magic engine, N and T are the total number of logical
qubits and logical cycles per shot and τ is the T count per
shot, which is upper bounded by
τ≤


2
|P |(Σ + Λ) + υ ,
3

(31)

Hence the expected runtime for the factoring is ttotal = σt.
4.

Results

We now consider the resources—both physical qubits
and time—required to factor an RSA-2048 integer on the
instantiation of the Pinnacle architecture presented in Section V, given different hardware parameters, namely the
code cycle time and physical error rate. Following Ref. [8],
we expect the required logical error rate per logical qubit
per logical cycle to be ≲ 10−14 (i.e., ≲ 10−15 per code
cycle). With reference to Table III, this motivates a choice
of the d = 24 GB code architecture for a physical error
rate of p = 10−3 and d = 16 for the p = 10−4 architecture. The precise logical failure rate of the algorithm varies
somewhat as other parameters affect the number of logical
qubits and logical cycles; this effect is accounted for in the
number of shots, given in Eq. (29).
To determine the minimal required physical qubits and
runtime, we optimise over the algorithmic parameters of
Gidney’s algorithm with the following ranges:

we fix the loop 1 window size as w1 = k/2. Following
Ref. [8], we also impose the feasibility condition that the
number of primes of bit length ℓ, π(ℓ) ≈ 2ℓ−1 /ℓ ln(2),
cannot be smaller than the number of primes |P |. The
results of this optimisation are shown in Table VI and
Fig. 3.
We find that fewer than one hundred thousand physical qubits are required for factoring at a physical error
rate of p = 10−3 in an expected runtime of one month.
Alternatively, with the same error rate and code cycle time,
factoring can be completed in one week with 139 thousand
physical qubits—compared to one million in Ref. [8]—or
in one day with 400 thousand physical qubits. With one
million physical qubits, factoring takes an expected time
of eight hours, compared with five days in Ref. [8].
We can also consider our results in regimes relevant
to other hardware platforms. For example, at a physical
error rate of p = 10−4 —relevant to trapped ions [16]—the
minimum number of physical qubits required for factoring
is 53 thousand. For a typical trapped ion code cycle time of
1 ms [61], factoring with one million physical qubits takes
an expected time of less than three months. Factoring in a
shorter time with these parameters is also possible with a
feasible number of physical qubits. For example, factoring
can be completed in one month with 2.7 million physical
qubits or in one week with 12 million physical qubits. By
comparison, adjusting the results of Ref. [8] to such a code
cycle time would give a prohibitively long runtime, while
Ref. [62] estimated a runtime of 3 years with 8.6 million
qubits for a surface code architecture with trapped ion
parameters.
Our results are also comparable to the results of Ref. [17],
which apply to a neutral atom platform with physical error
rate of p = 10−3 and a code cycle time of 1 ms. Specifically,
with 19 million qubits we find a runtime of 15 days, compared with the result of 5.6 days in Ref. [17] The low runtime achieved by that work is achieved by using transversal
gates with algorithmic fault tolerance to reduce the logical
cycle time to be equal to the code cycle time, compared
with dt = 26 code cycles on our architecture. Our architecture has the potential to support an analogous reduction
by incorporating fast surgery [63], with the potential to
achieve an order-of-magnitude lower runtime or physical
qubit number. We look forward to realising this potential
in future work.

• Ekerå-Håstad parameter, 1 ≤ s ≤ 16;
• Accumulator truncation, 24 ≤ f ≤ 59;
• Prime bit length, 18 ≤ ℓ ≤ 25;
• Loop 3 window size, 2 ≤ w3 ≤ 6;
• Loop 4 window size, 2 ≤ w4 ≤ 6.
We also optimise the parallelisation factor over the range
1 ≤ ρ ≤ |P |, where |P | ≈ nm/ℓw1 is the number of
primes in the residue system. Recall that, unlike in Ref. [8],

VII.

CONCLUSION

We have presented the Pinnacle Architecture, which
leverages the high encoding rate of QLDPC codes to
achieve universal quantum computing with order-ofmagnitude overhead reductions compared with surface
code architectures. In particular, we have shown that factoring 2048-bit RSA integers, which requires close to a million
physical qubits using surface code architectures [8], can
be done with fewer than one hundred thousand physical

18
TABLE V. Time cost accounting for all subroutines required for each prime in Gidney’s algorithm. Loop numbers refer to Gidney’s
algorithm, as presented in Ref. [8]. For lookups and phaseups, the size is the address size; for additions, it is the size of the registers
being added. For addition (loop 2) the size is the average over the loop, since it varies. The T Count column is the number of T gates
required, which is four times the Toffoli count. The Logical Cycles column is the total number of logical cycles, including both T state
injections and other logical measurements. Since each Toffoli gate requires four T gates and one logical measurement [60], and one
additional logical measurement is required for measurement-based uncompute, this is nearly always 3/2 times the T count. The only
exception is Lookup (Loop 1) which also requires additional logical measurements for Clifford frame cleaning.
Subroutine

Size

Instances

T Count

Lookup (Loop 1)

w1

⌈m/w1 ⌉

Addition (Loop 1)
Addition (Loop 2)

ℓ + len(m)

2ℓ + len(m) + 1 /2

4 len(m)

Lookup (Loop 3)

2w3

4⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉2 − 8⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ + 1

Addition (Loop 3)

ℓ

7⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉2 − 14⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉

4⌈m/w1 ⌉ (2w1 − w1 − 1)

4⌈m/w1 ⌉ ℓ + len(m) − 1

8 len(m) 2ℓ + len(m) − 1



2
2w3
4 4⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ − 8⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ + 1 2
− 2w3 − 1


28 ⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉2 − 2⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ (ℓ − 1)

Logical Cycles

⌈m/w1 ⌉ 6 (2w1 − w1 − 1) + 2w1

6⌈m/w1 ⌉ ℓ + len(m) − 1

12 len(m) 2ℓ + len(m) − 1


2
2w3
6 4⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ − 8⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ + 1 (2
− 2w3 − 1)


42(ℓ − 1) ⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉2 − 2⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉

Lookup (Loop 4)

w4

3⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉/2

6⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉ (2w4 − w4 − 1)

9⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉ (2w4 − w4 − 1)

Addition (Loop 4)

f

5⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉/2

10(f − 1)⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉

Phaseup (Loop 4)

w4

Phaseup (Loop 3.2)

w3

Phaseup (Loop 3.1)

2w3

⌈m/w1 ⌉

15(f − 1)⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉




4⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉ 2⌈w4 /2⌉ + 2⌊w4 /2⌋ − w4 − 2
6⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉ 2⌈w4 /2⌉ + 2⌊w4 /2⌋ − w4 − 2


 


2
2
⌈w3 /2⌉
⌊w3 /2⌋
2
⌈w3 /2⌉
⌊w3 /2⌋
3⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ /2 − 3⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ 6 ⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ − 2⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ 2
+2
− w3 − 2 9 ⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ − 2⌈ℓ/w3 ⌉ 2
+2
− w3 − 2




1
4 2w3 +1 − 2w3 − 2
6 2w3 +1 − 2w3 − 2
⌈ℓ/w4 ⌉

TABLE VI. Minimum number of physical qubits required to complete factoring in a range of expected runtimes for a range of
hardware parameters. Mq and kq represent megaqubits (i.e., ×106
qubits) and kiloqubits (×103 qubits) respectively.
Code Physical Physical Qubits for Runtime ≤
Cycle Error Rate 1 year 1 month 1 week 1 day
10−3
94 kq 94 kq 135 kq 381 kq
1 µs
10−4
53 kq 53 kq 64 kq 141 kq
10−3
94 kq 193 kq 501 kq 2.9 Mq
10 µs
10−4
53 kq 82 kq 176 kq 845 kq
−3
10
179 kq 1.0 Mq 4.1 Mq 30 Mq
100 µs
10−4
77 kq 323 kq 1.2 Mq 8.2 Mq
10−3
871 kq 9.5 Mq 44 Mq
1 ms
10−4
278 kq 2.7 Mq 12 Mq 108 Mq

qubits on the Pinnacle Architecture. Given the challenges
posed in scaling from one hundred thousand to one million physical qubits, such as the need on many hardware
platforms for networking between separated devices [9],
this has the potential to significantly hasten the onset of
practical quantum computing.
Importantly, this is only the beginning of the story for
QLDPC architectures. While it has been suggested that reducing the physical qubit count for 2048-bit RSA factoring
by an order of magnitude (i.e., to one hundred thousand
physical qubits) is implausible on surface code architectures [8], the same cannot be said of QLDPC architectures.
Indeed, a range of higher rate QLDPC codes are known
than the generalised bicycle codes used here [19]. Incorporating such codes into the Pinnacle Architecture, combined
with further optimisation of its components, could plausibly achieve such a reduction. As such, this work serves not
only as a major step forward in its own right, but also a
foundation on which we expect to make substantial further
progress.

VIII.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Stephen Bartlett and Kevin Obenland for discussions, Calida Tang for organisational support, Fernando
Borretti for software engineering support, Max McIsted for
assistance with preparing the figures, and Scott Aaronson
for thoughtful feedback on the title. We also thank Marcel
Hinsche for identifying a technical error in the method
used to combine accumulators during factoring in the first
version of this paper, and for assisting in its correction.

Appendix A: Cost of Clifford Frame Cleaning

In this appendix, we show that Clifford frame cleaning
can be completed using the number of logical measurements claimed in Section IV B 3. Specifically, we show that
it can be completed in the same number of Pauli π/4 rotations, which we write as Rπ/4 (P ) for a Pauli rotation
axis P . Each such rotation can be implemented by a joint
logical Pauli measurement with a single logical ancilla in
the |0̄⟩ state [6].
We present our proofs using the Pauli and Clifford
operator representation of Ref. [64]. Specifically, an nqubit Pauli operator is associated (uniquely, up to a global
phase)
with an element v ∈ Z2n
2 by the expression Pv =
Qn
vi vn+i
. In this formalism, Pu Pv = Pu+v . Comi=1 Xi Zi
mutation relations are specified by the symplectic inner
product
T

⟨u, v⟩ = uJv ,




0 In
J=
,
In 0

(A1)

and u and v are treated as row vectors. Specifically, Pu and
Pv commute if ⟨u, v⟩ = 0, and anti-commute if ⟨u, v⟩ =
1. The symplectic complement W ⊥ of subspace W is a
subspace whose elements commute with all elements in
W.

19
In the same formalism, an n-qubit Clifford operator
U can be represented by a 2n × 2n matrix MU that
preserves the symplectic inner product (i.e., such that
MU JMUT = J). The action of U on Pv by conjugation
corresponds to matrix multiplication on the right (i.e.,
P 7→ U P U † corresponds to v 7→ vMU ). The product
of two Clifford operators V U therefore corresponds to
the product of their matrix representations MU MV . A
Pauli π/4 rotation Rπ/4 (Q) is a special type of Clifford
operator which is specified by an n-qubit Pauli operator Q. It acts as Rπ/4 (Q)P Rπ/4 (Q)† = P Q if P and Q
anti-commute, and as Rπ/4 (Q)P Rπ/4 (Q)† = P if P and
Q commute. Therefore, Rπ/4 (Pu ) acts on v ∈ Z2n
2 as
Eu (v) = v + ⟨u, v⟩u.
There are two cases of Clifford frame cleaning to consider: the general case, where 4w steps are required to
clean off w qubits; and the case of cleaning a memory port,
where only 2w steps are required. We first consider the
general case.
Lemma 1. Let U be an n-qubit Clifford operator. Then for w ≤ n, there exists a sequence
of 4w Pauli operators P1 , . . . , P4w such that
Rπ/4 (P1 )Rπ/4 (P2 ) . . . Rπ/4 (P4w )U is a Clifford operator supported only on the last n − w qubits.
Proof. We proceed by induction. Let


Ik 0 0 0
 0 ∗ 0 ∗

M (k) = 
 0 0 Ik 0  .
0 ∗ 0 ∗


Let M̃ (k−1) = Eek +u Ev(k) +u M (k−1) and the ith row
of M̃ (k−1) be ṽ (i) . As this preserves the symplectic product,
1 = ⟨v (k) , v (n+k) ⟩ = ⟨ṽ (k) , ṽ (n+k) ⟩ = ⟨ek , ṽ (n+k) ⟩. We
now consider two cases, and in each choose α3 , α4 such
that they fix ek and map ṽ (n+k) to fk .
First, if ⟨ṽ (n+k) , fk ⟩ = 1, let α3 = ṽ (n+k) + fk and
α4 = 0. Then ⟨ṽ (n+k) , ṽ (n+k) + fk ⟩ = 1, and so
Eṽ(n+k) +fk (ṽ (n+k) ) = fk .

(A5)

We also have ⟨ek , ṽ (n+k) + fk ⟩ = 0, which implies that
Eṽ(n+k) +fk (ek ) = ek .
Second, if ⟨ṽ (n+k) , fk ⟩ = 0, let α3 = ṽ (n+k) + ek + fk
and α4 = ek . Then ⟨ṽ (n+k) , ṽ (n+k) + ek + fk ⟩ = 1, and
so
Eek Eṽ(n+k) +ek +fk (ṽ (n+k) ) = Eek (ek + fk ) = fk . (A6)
We also have ⟨ek , ṽ (n+k) + ek + fk ⟩ = 0, which implies
that Eek Eṽ(n+k) +ek +fk (ek ) = ek .
Hence in all cases
M (k) = Eα4 Eα3 Eα2 Eα1 M (k−1) ,

(A7)

which completes the proof.
(A2)

We will show for 1 ≤ k ≤ w, given a matrix of the form
M (k−1) , that there exists a product of four Pauli π/4 rotations with matrices Eα1 , Eα2 , Eα3 , and Eα4 , such that
Eα4 Eα3 Eα2 Eα1 M (k−1) is of the form M (k) . It follows
that U = M (0) can be mapped to an operator M (w) that
has support only on the last n − w qubits with 4w Pauli
π/4 rotations.
Let v (k) denote the kth row of M (k−1) , ek denote
the kth vector in the standard symplectic basis and
fk = en+k , and let Ak−1 be the symplectic subspace
spanned by {e1 , . . . ek−1 , f1 , . . . fk−1 } corresponding to
the Pauli group on the first k − 1 qubits. We will choose
α1 , α2 , α3 , α4 ∈ A⊥
k−1 to ensure that these operations act
as the identity on all a ∈ Ak−1 . We now consider two
cases, and in each choose α1 , α2 such that they map v (k)
to ek .
First, if ⟨v (k) , ek ⟩ = 1, let α1 = v (k) + ek and α2 = 0.
Then ⟨v (k) , v (k) + ek ⟩ = 1, and so
Ev(k) +ek (v (k) ) = ek .

Then ⟨v (k) , v (k) + uk ⟩ = ⟨uk , ek + uk ⟩ = 1, and so

Eek +uk Ev(k) +uk v (k) = Eek +uk (uk ) = ek .
(A4)

(A3)

Second, if ⟨v (k) , ek ⟩ = 0, then if ⟨v (k) , fk ⟩ = 1 let uk =
fk , and if ⟨v (k) , fk ⟩ = 0 let uk = fk + en+δ (mod 2n) ,
where δ > k is the position of the first nonzero element
of v (k) . Moreover, let α1 = v (k) + uk and α2 = ek + uk .

Now we consider the specific case of cleaning a memory
port.
Lemma 2. Let U be an n-qubit Clifford operator that is
a product of Clifford operators that act either trivially or
as the control of a CNOT on the first w ≤ n qubits. Then
there exists a sequence of 2w Pauli operators P1 , . . . , P2w
such that Rπ/4 (P1 )Rπ/4 (P2 ) . . . Rπ/4 (P2w )U is a Clifford
operator supported only on the last n − w qubits.
Proof. Since CNOTs commute with Z operators on their
control qubits, U must commute with all Z-type operators
with support on the first w qubits. Consequently, the matrix
representation of U has the form


Iw ∗ ∗ ∗
 0 ∗ ∗ ∗

U =
(A8)
 0 0 Iw 0  .
0 ∗ ∗ ∗
We proceed by induction, analogously to the proof of
Lemma 1. Let


Ik 0 0 0
0 0
 0 Iw−k ∗ 0
∗ ∗



0
0
∗
0
∗ ∗
(k)

.
M
=
(A9)
0 0 Ik 0 0 
 0

 0
0 0 0 Iw−k 0 
0
0 ∗ 0
∗ ∗

20
We will show for 1 ≤ k ≤ w, given a matrix of the
form M (k−1) , that there exists a product of two Pauli
π/4 rotations with matrices Eα1 and Eα2 , such that
Eα2 Eα1 M (k−1) is of the form M (k) . It follows that U =
M (0) can be mapped to an operator M (w) that has support
only on the last n − w qubits with 2w Pauli π/4 rotations.
Let v (k) denote the kth row of M (k−1) , ek denote the
kth vector in the standard symplectic basis and fk =
en+k , and let Ak−1 be the symplectic subspace spanned
by {e1 , . . . ek−1 , f1 , . . . fk−1 } corresponding to the Pauli
group on the first k − 1 qubits. We will choose α1 , α2 ∈
A⊥
k−1 to ensure that these operations act as the identity on
all a ∈ Ak−1 , and such that they also fix fj for k ≤ j ≤ w
and map v (k) to ek . We now consider two cases, noting
that the structure of M (k−1) implies that ⟨v (k) , fj ⟩ = δjk
for 1 ≤ j ≤ w.
First, if ⟨v (k) , ek ⟩ = 1, let α1 = v (k) + ek and α2 = 0.

[1] P. Shor, Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring, in Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science (1994) pp. 124–134.
[2] S. Lloyd, Universal quantum simulators, Science 273, 1073
(1996).
[3] D. Gottesman, Opportunities and challenges in faulttolerant quantum computation (2022), arXiv:2210.15844.
[4] A. G. Fowler, M. Mariantoni, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Cleland, Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation, Physical Review A 86, 032324 (2012),
arXiv:1208.0928.
[5] D. Horsman, A. G. Fowler, S. Devitt, and R. V. Meter, Surface
code quantum computing by lattice surgery, New Journal
of Physics 14, 123011 (2012), arXiv:1111.4022.
[6] D. Litinski, A game of surface codes: Large-scale quantum
computing with lattice surgery, Quantum 3, 128 (2019),
arXiv:1808.02892.
[7] C. Gidney and M. Ekerå, How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers
in 8 hours using 20 million noisy qubits, Quantum 5, 433
(2021), arXiv:1905.09749.
[8] C. Gidney, How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers with less
than a million noisy qubits (2025), arXiv:2505.15917.
[9] M. Mohseni, A. Scherer, K. G. Johnson, O. Wertheim, M. Otten, N. A. Aadit, Y. Alexeev, K. M. Bresniker, K. Y. Camsari, B. Chapman, S. Chatterjee, G. A. Dagnew, A. Esposito, F. Fahim, M. Fiorentino, A. Gajjar, A. Khalid, X. Kong,
B. Kulchytskyy, E. Kyoseva, R. Li, P. A. Lott, I. L. Markov, R. F.
McDermott, G. Pedretti, P. Rao, E. Rieffel, A. Silva, J. Sorebo,
P. Spentzouris, Z. Steiner, B. Torosov, D. Venturelli, R. J.
Visser, Z. Webb, X. Zhan, Y. Cohen, P. Ronagh, A. Ho, R. G.
Beausoleil, and J. M. Martinis, How to build a quantum supercomputer: Scaling from hundreds to millions of qubits
(2025), arXiv:2411.10406.
[10] T. J. Yoder, E. Schoute, P. Rall, E. Pritchett, J. M. Gambetta,
A. W. Cross, M. Carroll, and M. E. Beverland, Tour de gross:
A modular quantum computer based on bivariate bicycle
codes (2025), arXiv:2506.03094.
[11] P. Webster, S. C. Smith, and L. Z. Cohen, Explicit construc-

Then ⟨v (k) , v (k) + ek ⟩ = 1, and so

Ev(k) +ek v (k) = ek .

(A10)

We also have ⟨fj , v (k) + ek ⟩ = 2δjk = 0 for k ≤ j ≤ w,
which implies that Ev(k) +ek (fj ) = fj .
Second, if ⟨v (k) , ek ⟩ = 0, let α1 = v (k) + ek + fk and
α2 = fk . Then ⟨v (k) , v (k) + ek + fk ⟩ = 1, and so

Efk Ev(k) +ek +fk v (k) = Efk (ek + fk ) = ek . (A11)
We also have ⟨fj , v (k) + ek ⟩ = 2δjk = 0 for k ≤ j ≤ w,
which implies that Efk Ev(k) +ek +fk (fj ) = fj .
Hence in all cases
M (k) = Eα2 Eα1 M (k−1) ,

(A12)

which completes the proof.

tion of low-overhead gadgets for gates on quantum LDPC
codes (2025), arXiv:2511.15989.
[12] C. Chamberland and E. T. Campbell, Universal quantum
computing with twist-free and temporally encoded lattice
surgery, PRX Quantum 3, 010331 (2022), arXiv:2109.02746.
[13] I. D. Kivlichan, C. Gidney, D. W. Berry, N. Wiebe, J. McClean,
W. Sun, Z. Jiang, N. Rubin, A. Fowler, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
H. Neven, and R. Babbush, Improved fault-tolerant quantum simulation of condensed-phase correlated electrons via
Trotterization, Quantum 4, 296 (2020), arXiv:1902.10673.
[14] S. Bravyi, G. Smith, and J. Smolin, Trading classical and
quantum computational resources, Physical Review X 6,
021043 (2016), arXiv:1506.01396.
[15] E. T. Campbell, Early fault-tolerant simulations of the Hubbard model, Quantum Science and Technology 7, 015007
(2022), arXiv:2012.09238.
[16] A. C. Hughes, R. Srinivas, C. M. Löschnauer, H. M.
Knaack, R. Matt, C. J. Ballance, M. Malinowski, T. P.
Harty, and R. T. Sutherland, Trapped-ion two-qubit gates
with >99.99% fidelity without ground-state cooling (2025),
arXiv:2510.17286.
[17] H. Zhou, C. Duckering, C. Zhao, D. Bluvstein, M. Cain, A. Kubica, S.-T. Wang, and M. D. Lukin, Resource analysis of
low-overhead transversal architectures for reconfigurable
atom arrays, in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (2025) pp. 1432–1448,
arXiv:2505.15907.
[18] D. J. C. MacKay, G. Mitchison, and P. L. McFadden, Sparse
graph codes for quantum error-correction, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 50, 2315 (2004), arXiv:quantph/0304161.
[19] N. P. Breuckmann and J. N. Eberhardt, Quantum lowdensity parity-check codes, PRX Quantum 2, 040101 (2021),
arXiv:2103.06309.
[20] J. Yoneda, W. Huang, M. Feng, C. H. Yang, K. W. Chan,
T. Tanttu, W. Gilbert, R. C. C. Leon, F. E. Hudson, K. M. Itoh,
A. Morello, S. D. Bartlett, A. Laucht, A. Saraiva, and A. S.
Dzurak, Coherent spin qubit transport in silicon, Nature

21
Communications 12, 4114 (2021), arXiv:2008.04020.
[21] M. Malinowski, D. T. C. Allcock, and C. J. Ballance, How
to wire a 1000-qubit trapped ion quantum computer, PRX
Quantum 4, 040313 (2023), arXiv:2305.12773.
[22] D. Bluvstein, H. Levine, G. Semeghini, T. T. Wang, S. Ebadi,
M. Kalinowski, A. Keesling, N. Maskara, H. Pichler,
M. Greiner, V. Vuletic, and M. D. Lukin, A quantum processor based on coherent transport of entangled atom arrays,
Nature 604, 451 (2022), arXiv:2112.03923.
[23] H. Bombin, I. H. Kim, D. Litinski, N. Nickerson, M. Pant,
F. Pastawski, S. Roberts, and T. Rudolph, Interleaving: Modular architectures for fault-tolerant photonic quantum computing (2021), arXiv:2103.08612.
[24] S. Bravyi, A. W. Cross, J. M. Gambetta, D. Maslov, P. Rall, and
T. J. Yoder, High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant
quantum memory, Nature 627, 778 (2024), arXiv:2308.07915.
[25] L. Z. Cohen, I. H. Kim, S. D. Bartlett, and B. J. Brown, Lowoverhead fault-tolerant quantum computing using longrange connectivity, Science Advances 8, eabn1717 (2022),
arXiv:2110.10794.
[26] D. J. Williamson and T. J. Yoder, Low-overhead fault-tolerant
quantum computation by gauging logical operators (2024),
arXiv:2410.02213.
[27] B. Ide, M. G. Gowda, P. J. Nadkarni, and G. Dauphinais, Fault-tolerant logical measurements via homological measurement, Physical Review X 15, 021088 (2025),
arXiv:2410.02753.
[28] Following Refs [6, 10], we assume that the time required
between logical measurements is negligible compared with
the timescale of a logical cycle.
[29] A. W. Cross, Z. He, P. J. Rall, and T. J. Yoder, Improved
QLDPC surgery: Logical measurements and bridging codes
(2025), arXiv:2407.18393.
[30] E. Swaroop, T. Jochym-O’Connor, and T. J. Yoder, Universal
adapters between quantum low-density parity check codes,
PRX Quantum 7, 010324 (2026), arXiv:2410.03628.
[31] Z. He, A. Cowtan, D. J. Williamson, and T. J. Yoder, Extractors: QLDPC architectures for efficient Pauli-based computation (2025), arXiv:2503.10390.
[32] R. Acharya, L. Aghababaie-Beni, I. Aleiner, T. I. Andersen,
M. Ansmann, F. Arute, K. Arya, A. Asfaw, N. Astrakhantsev,
J. Atalaya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, B. Ballard, J. C. Bardin,
J. Bausch, A. Bengtsson, A. Bilmes, S. Blackwell, S. Boixo,
G. Bortoli, A. Bourassa, J. Bovaird, L. Brill, M. Broughton,
D. A. Browne, B. Buchea, B. B. Buckley, D. A. Buell, T. Burger,
B. Burkett, N. Bushnell, A. Cabrera, J. Campero, H.-S. Chang,
Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, D. Chik, C. Chou, J. Claes,
A. Y. Cleland, J. Cogan, R. Collins, P. Conner, W. Courtney,
A. L. Crook, B. Curtin, S. Das, A. Davies, L. D. Lorenzo,
D. M. Debroy, S. Demura, M. Devoret, A. D. Paolo, P. Donohoe, I. Drozdov, A. Dunsworth, C. Earle, T. Edlich, A. Eickbusch, A. M. Elbag, M. Elzouka, C. Erickson, L. Faoro,
E. Farhi, V. S. Ferreira, L. F. Burgos, E. Forati, A. G. Fowler,
B. Foxen, S. Ganjam, G. Garcia, R. Gasca, É. Genois, W. Giang,
C. Gidney, D. Gilboa, R. Gosula, A. G. Dau, D. Graumann,
A. Greene, J. A. Gross, S. Habegger, J. Hall, M. C. Hamilton,
M. Hansen, M. P. Harrigan, S. D. Harrington, F. J. H. Heras,
S. Heslin, P. Heu, O. Higgott, G. Hill, J. Hilton, G. Holland,
S. Hong, H.-Y. Huang, A. Huff, W. J. Huggins, L. B. Ioffe,
S. V. Isakov, J. Iveland, E. Jeffrey, Z. Jiang, C. Jones, S. Jordan, C. Joshi, P. Juhas, D. Kafri, H. Kang, A. H. Karamlou,
K. Kechedzhi, J. Kelly, T. Khaire, T. Khattar, M. Khezri, S. Kim,
P. V. Klimov, A. R. Klots, B. Kobrin, P. Kohli, A. N. Korotkov,

F. Kostritsa, R. Kothari, B. Kozlovskii, J. M. Kreikebaum,
V. D. Kurilovich, N. Lacroix, D. Landhuis, T. Lange-Dei,
B. W. Langley, P. Laptev, K.-M. Lau, L. L. Guevel, J. Ledford, K. Lee, Y. D. Lensky, S. Leon, B. J. Lester, W. Y. Li, Y. Li,
A. T. Lill, W. Liu, W. P. Livingston, A. Locharla, E. Lucero,
D. Lundahl, A. Lunt, S. Madhuk, F. D. Malone, A. Maloney,
S. Mandrá, L. S. Martin, S. Martin, O. Martin, C. Maxfield,
J. R. McClean, M. McEwen, S. Meeks, A. Megrant, X. Mi,
K. C. Miao, A. Mieszala, R. Molavi, S. Molina, S. Montazeri,
A. Morvan, R. Movassagh, W. Mruczkiewicz, O. Naaman,
M. Neeley, C. Neill, A. Nersisyan, H. Neven, M. Newman,
J. H. Ng, A. Nguyen, M. Nguyen, C.-H. Ni, T. E. O’Brien, W. D.
Oliver, A. Opremcak, K. Ottosson, A. Petukhov, A. Pizzuto,
J. Platt, R. Potter, O. Pritchard, L. P. Pryadko, C. Quintana,
G. Ramachandran, M. J. Reagor, D. M. Rhodes, G. Roberts,
E. Rosenberg, E. Rosenfeld, P. Roushan, N. C. Rubin, N. Saei,
D. Sank, K. Sankaragomathi, K. J. Satzinger, H. F. Schurkus,
C. Schuster, A. W. Senior, M. J. Shearn, A. Shorter, N. Shutty,
V. Shvarts, S. Singh, V. Sivak, J. Skruzny, S. Small, V. Smelyanskiy, W. C. Smith, R. D. Somma, S. Springer, G. Sterling,
D. Strain, J. Suchard, A. Szasz, A. Sztein, D. Thor, A. Torres, M. M. Torunbalci, A. Vaishnav, J. Vargas, S. Vdovichev,
G. Vidal, B. Villalonga, C. V. Heidweiller, S. Waltman, S. X.
Wang, B. Ware, K. Weber, T. White, K. Wong, B. W. K. Woo,
C. Xing, Z. J. Yao, P. Yeh, B. Ying, J. Yoo, N. Yosri, G. Young,
A. Zalcman, Y. Zhang, N. Zhu, and N. Zobrist, Quantum
error correction below the surface code threshold, Nature
638, 920 (2025), arXiv:2408.13687.
[33] D. Pataki and A. Pályi, Compiling the surface code to crossbar spin qubit architectures, Physical Review B 111, 115307
(2025), arXiv:2412.05425.
[34] H. Leone, T. Le, S. Srikara, and S. Devitt, Resource overheads
and attainable rates for trapped-ion lattice surgery, Physical
Review Research 7, 023088 (2025), arXiv:2406.18764.
[35] R. Babbush, C. Gidney, D. W. Berry, N. Wiebe, J. McClean,
A. Paler, A. Fowler, and H. Neven, Encoding electronic spectra in quantum circuits with linear T complexity, Physical
Review X 8, 041015 (2018), arXiv:1805.03662.
[36] D. Filippov, P. Yang, and P. Murali, Architecting distributed
quantum computers: Design insights from resource estimation (2025), arXiv:2508.19160.
[37] A. A. Kovalev and L. P. Pryadko, Quantum Kronecker sumproduct low-density parity-check codes with finite rate,
Physical Review A 88, 012311 (2013), arXiv:1212.6703.
[38] P. Panteleev and G. Kalachev, Degenerate quantum LDPC
codes with good finite length performance, Quantum 5, 585
(2021), arXiv:1904.02703.
[39] J. du Crest, M. Mhalla, and V. Savin, Stabilizer inactivation for message-passing decoding of quantum LDPC codes
(2023), arXiv:2205.06125.
[40] H.-K. Lin, X. Liu, P. K. Lim, and L. P. Pryadko, Single-shot
and two-shot decoding with generalized bicycle codes (2025),
arXiv:2502.19406.
[41] M. Wang and F. Mueller, Coprime bivariate bicycle codes
and their layouts on cold atoms, Quantum 10, 2009 (2026),
arXiv:2408.10001.
[42] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of ErrorCorrecting Codes, North-Holland Mathematical Library,
Vol. 16 (Elsevier, 1977).
[43] A. Cowtan, Z. He, D. J. Williamson, and T. J. Yoder, Parallel logical measurements via quantum code surgery (2026),
arXiv:2503.05003.
[44] S. Bravyi and A. Kitaev, Universal quantum computation

22
with ideal Clifford gates and noisy ancillas, Physical Review
A 71, 022316 (2005), arXiv:quant-ph/0403025.
[45] D. Litinski, Magic state distillation: Not as costly as you
think, Quantum 3, 205 (2019), arXiv:1905.06903.
[46] H. Goto, Minimizing resource overheads for fault-tolerant
preparation of encoded states of the Steane code, Scientific
Reports 6, 19578 (2016).
[47] T. Itogawa, Y. Takada, Y. Hirano, and K. Fujii, Efficient magic
state distillation by zero-level distillation, PRX Quantum 6,
020356 (2025), arXiv:2403.03991.
[48] C. Gidney, N. Shutty, and C. Jones, Magic state cultivation: Growing T states as cheap as CNOT gates (2024),
arXiv:2409.17595.
[49] K. Sahay, P.-K. Tsai, K. Chang, Q. Su, T. B. Smith, S. Singh,
and S. Puri, Fold-transversal surface code cultivation (2025),
arXiv:2509.05212.
[50] We estimate these reject rates using data on expected attempts (which we denote γ) from Ref. [49], extrapolating
under the assumption that the failure rate is linear in p for
the case of p = 10−4 . Specifically, the overall reject rate
is then given by pr = (1 − (1 − 1/γ)ξ )15 , where ξ is the
number of attempts that are possible in the available time
and with the throughput provided by the ancilla systems
(ξ = 2 for the p = 10−4 case and ξ = 5 for the p = 10−3
cases).
[51] A. R. O’Rourke and S. Devitt, Compare the pair: Rotated versus unrotated surface codes at equal logical error rates, Physical Review Research 7, 033074 (2025), arXiv:2409.14765.
[52] This suffices since we can choose the eight logical measurements in the first batch to act trivially on one of the four
logical qubits involved in post-selection.
[53] S. Vittal, A. Javadi-Abhari, A. W. Cross, L. S. Bishop, and
M. Qureshi, Flag-proxy networks: Overcoming the architectural, scheduling and decoding obstacles of quantum
LDPC codes, in 2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) (2024) pp. 718–734,
arXiv:2409.14283.
[54] N. Raveendran and B. Vasić, Trapping sets of quantum LDPC

codes, Quantum 5, 562 (2021), arXiv:2012.15297.
[55] A. Paetznick and K. M. Svore, Repeat-until-success: Nondeterministic decomposition of single-qubit unitaries,
Quantum Information and Computation 14, 1277 (2014),
arXiv:1311.1074.
[56] A. Bocharov, M. Roetteler, and K. M. Svore, Efficient synthesis of universal repeat-until-success circuits, Physical
Review Letters 114, 080502 (2015), arXiv:1404.5320.
[57] For simplicity, we here follow Ref. [15] in using this approach. We note that more recent advances in rotation synthesis have since been presented [65], which may allow for
reduced runtimes if incorporated in future.
[58] M. Ekerå and J. Håstad, Quantum algorithms for computing
short discrete logarithms and factoring RSA integers, in
Post-Quantum Cryptography, Vol. 10346 (2017) pp. 347–363,
arXiv:1702.00249.
[59] C. Chevignard, P.-A. Fouque, and A. Schrottenloher, Reducing the number of qubits in quantum factoring, in Advances
in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2025, edited by Y. Tauman Kalai
and S. F. Kamara (2025) pp. 384–415.
[60] C. Jones, Low-overhead constructions for the faulttolerant Toffoli gate, Physical Review A 87, 022328 (2013),
arXiv:1212.5069.
[61] D. Litinski, How to compute a 256-bit elliptic curve
private key with only 50 million Toffoli gates (2023),
arXiv:2306.08585.
[62] M. E. Beverland, P. Murali, M. Troyer, K. M. Svore, T. Hoefler,
V. Kliuchnikov, G. H. Low, M. Soeken, A. Sundaram, and
A. Vaschillo, Assessing requirements to scale to practical
quantum advantage (2022), arXiv:2211.07629.
[63] N. Baspin, L. Berent, and L. Z. Cohen, Fast surgery for quantum LDPC codes (2025), arXiv:2510.04521.
[64] S. Aaronson and D. Gottesman, Improved simulation of
stabilizer circuits, Physical Review A 70, 052328 (2004),
arXiv:quant-ph/0406196.
[65] V. Kliuchnikov, K. Lauter, R. Minko, A. Paetznick, and C. Petit, Shorter quantum circuits via single-qubit gate approximation, Quantum 7, 1208 (2023), arXiv:2203.10064.

