                                        Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization
                                         and Discrete Logarithms on a Quantum Computer∗
arXiv:quant-ph/9508027v2 25 Jan 1996




                                                                              Peter W. Shor†


                                                                                  Abstract
                                                 A digital computer is generally believed to be an efficient universal computing
                                             device; that is, it is believed able to simulate any physical computing device with
                                             an increase in computation time by at most a polynomial factor. This may not be
                                             true when quantum mechanics is taken into consideration. This paper considers
                                             factoring integers and finding discrete logarithms, two problems which are generally
                                             thought to be hard on a classical computer and which have been used as the basis
                                             of several proposed cryptosystems. Efficient randomized algorithms are given for
                                             these two problems on a hypothetical quantum computer. These algorithms take
                                             a number of steps polynomial in the input size, e.g., the number of digits of the
                                             integer to be factored.


                                          Keywords: algorithmic number theory, prime factorization, discrete logarithms,
                                       Church’s thesis, quantum computers, foundations of quantum mechanics, spin systems,
                                       Fourier transforms

                                          AMS subject classifications: 81P10, 11Y05, 68Q10, 03D10




                                          ∗ A preliminary version of this paper appeared in the Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium

                                       on Foundations of Computer Science, Santa Fe, NM, Nov. 20–22, 1994, IEEE Computer Society Press,
                                       pp. 124–134.
                                          † AT&T Research, Room 2D-149, 600 Mountain Ave., Murray Hill, NJ 07974.




                                                                                      1
2                                                                           P. W. SHOR


1    Introduction
One of the first results in the mathematics of computation, which underlies the subse-
quent development of much of theoretical computer science, was the distinction between
computable and non-computable functions shown in papers of Church [1936], Turing
[1936], and Post [1936]. Central to this result is Church’s thesis, which says that all
computing devices can be simulated by a Turing machine. This thesis greatly simpli-
fies the study of computation, since it reduces the potential field of study from any of
an infinite number of potential computing devices to Turing machines. Church’s thesis
is not a mathematical theorem; to make it one would require a precise mathematical
description of a computing device. Such a description, however, would leave open the
possibility of some practical computing device which did not satisfy this precise math-
ematical description, and thus would make the resulting mathematical theorem weaker
than Church’s original thesis.
    With the development of practical computers, it has become apparent that the dis-
tinction between computable and non-computable functions is much too coarse; com-
puter scientists are now interested in the exact efficiency with which specific functions
can be computed. This exact efficiency, on the other hand, is too precise a quantity to
work with easily. The generally accepted compromise between coarseness and precision
distinguishes efficiently and inefficiently computable functions by whether the length of
the computation scales polynomially or superpolynomially with the input size. The class
of problems which can be solved by algorithms having a number of steps polynomial in
the input size is known as P.
    For this classification to make sense, we need it to be machine-independent. That is,
we need to know that whether a function is computable in polynomial time is indepen-
dent of the kind of computing device used. This corresponds to the following quantitative
version of Church’s thesis, which Vergis et al. [1986] have called the “Strong Church’s
Thesis” and which makes up half of the “Invariance Thesis” of van Emde Boas [1990].
    Thesis (Quantitative Church’s thesis). Any physical computing device can be simu-
lated by a Turing machine in a number of steps polynomial in the resources used by the
computing device.
    In statements of this thesis, the Turing machine is sometimes augmented with a ran-
dom number generator, as it has not yet been determined whether there are pseudoran-
dom number generators which can efficiently simulate truly random number generators
for all purposes. Readers who are not comfortable with Turing machines may think
instead of digital computers having an amount of memory that grows linearly with the
length of the computation, as these two classes of computing machines can efficiently
simulate each other.
    There are two escape clauses in the above thesis. One of these is the word “physical.”
Researchers have produced machine models that violate the above quantitative Church’s
thesis, but most of these have been ruled out by some reason for why they are not “phys-
ical,” that is, why they could not be built and made to work. The other escape clause in
the above thesis is the word “resources,” the meaning of which is not completely speci-
fied above. There are generally two resources which limit the ability of digital computers
to solve large problems: time (computation steps) and space (memory). There are more
resources pertinent to analog computation; some proposed analog machines that seem
able to solve NP-complete problems in polynomial time have required the machining of
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                                       3


exponentially precise parts, or an exponential amount of energy. (See Vergis et al. [1986]
and Steiglitz [1988]; this issue is also implicit in the papers of Canny and Reif [1987]
and Choi et al. [1995] on three-dimensional shortest paths.)
    For quantum computation, in addition to space and time, there is also a third poten-
tially important resource, precision. For a quantum computer to work, at least in any
currently envisioned implementation, it must be able to make changes in the quantum
states of objects (e.g., atoms, photons, or nuclear spins). These changes can clearly
not be perfectly accurate, but must contain some small amount of inherent impreci-
sion. If this imprecision is constant (i.e., it does not depend on the size of the input),
then it is not known how to compute any functions in polynomial time on a quantum
computer that cannot also be computed in polynomial time on a classical computer
with a random number generator. However, if we let the precision grow polynomially
in the input size (that is, we let the number of bits of precision grow logarithmically
in the input size), we appear to obtain a more powerful type of computer. Allowing
the same polynomial growth in precision does not appear to confer extra computing
power to classical mechanics, although allowing exponential growth in precision does
[Hartmanis and Simon 1974, Vergis et al. 1986].
    As far as we know, what precision is possible in quantum state manipulation is dic-
tated not by fundamental physical laws but by the properties of the materials and the
architecture with which a quantum computer is built. It is currently not clear which
architectures, if any, will give high precision, and what this precision will be. If the pre-
cision of a quantum computer is large enough to make it more powerful than a classical
computer, then in order to understand its potential it is important to think of precision
as a resource that can vary. Treating the precision as a large constant (even though it is
almost certain to be constant for any given machine) would be comparable to treating
a classical digital computer as a finite automaton — since any given computer has a
fixed amount of memory, this view is technically correct; however, it is not particularly
useful.
    Because of the remarkable effectiveness of our mathematical models of computation,
computer scientists have tended to forget that computation is dependent on the laws of
physics. This can be seen in the statement of the quantitative Church’s thesis in van
Emde Boas [1990], where the word “physical” in the above phrasing is replaced with
the word “reasonable.” It is difficult to imagine any definition of “reasonable” in this
context which does not mean “physically realizable,” i.e., that this computing machine
could actually be built and would work.
    Computer scientists have become convinced of the truth of the quantitative Church’s
thesis through the failure of all proposed counter-examples. Most of these proposed
counter-examples have been based on the laws of classical mechanics; however, the uni-
verse is in reality quantum mechanical. Quantum mechanical objects often behave quite
differently from how our intuition, based on classical mechanics, tells us they should.
It thus seems plausible that the natural computing power of classical mechanics corre-
sponds to Turing machines,1 while the natural computing power of quantum mechanics
might be greater.
   1 I believe that this question has not yet been settled and is worthy of further investigation. See

Vergis et al. [1986], Steiglitz [1988], and Rubel [1989]. In particular, turbulence seems a good candidate
for a counterexample to the quantitative Church’s thesis because the non-trivial dynamics on many
length scales may make it difficult to simulate on a classical computer.
4                                                                            P. W. SHOR


    The first person to look at the interaction between computation and quantum me-
chanics appears to have been Benioff [1980, 1982a, 1982b]. Although he did not ask
whether quantum mechanics conferred extra power to computation, he showed that re-
versible unitary evolution was sufficient to realize the computational power of a Turing
machine, thus showing that quantum mechanics is at least as powerful computationally
as a classical computer. This work was fundamental in making later investigation of
quantum computers possible.
    Feynman [1982,1986] seems to have been the first to suggest that quantum mechanics
might be more powerful computationally than a Turing machine. He gave arguments as
to why quantum mechanics might be intrinsically expensive computationally to simulate
on a classical computer. He also raised the possibility of using a computer based on
quantum mechanical principles to avoid this problem, thus implicitly asking the converse
question: by using quantum mechanics in a computer can you compute more efficiently
than on a classical computer? Deutsch [1985, 1989] was the first to ask this question
explicitly. In order to study this question, he defined both quantum Turing machines
and quantum circuits and investigated some of their properties.
    The question of whether using quantum mechanics in a computer allows one to
obtain more computational power was more recently addressed by Deutsch and Jozsa
[1992] and Berthiaume and Brassard [1992a, 1992b]. These papers showed that there
are problems which quantum computers can quickly solve exactly, but that classical
computers can only solve quickly with high probability and the aid of a random number
generator. However, these papers did not show how to solve any problem in quantum
polynomial time that was not already known to be solvable in polynomial time with
the aid of a random number generator, allowing a small probability of error; this is
the characterization of the complexity class BPP, which is widely viewed as the class of
efficiently solvable problems.
    Further work on this problem was stimulated by Bernstein and Vazirani [1993]. One
of the results contained in their paper was an oracle problem (that is, a problem involving
a “black box” subroutine that the computer is allowed to perform, but for which no code
is accessible) which can be done in polynomial time on a quantum Turing machine but
which requires super-polynomial time on a classical computer. This result was improved
by Simon [1994], who gave a much simpler construction of an oracle problem which takes
polynomial time on a quantum computer but requires exponential time on a classical
computer. Indeed, while Bernstein and Vaziarni’s problem appears contrived, Simon’s
problem looks quite natural. Simon’s algorithm inspired the work presented in this
paper.
    Two number theory problems which have been studied extensively but for which no
polynomial-time algorithms have yet been discovered are finding discrete logarithms and
factoring integers [Pomerance 1987, Gordon 1993, Lenstra and Lenstra 1993, Adleman
and McCurley 1995]. These problems are so widely believed to be hard that several
cryptosystems based on their difficulty have been proposed, including the widely used
RSA public key cryptosystem developed by Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman [1978]. We
show that these problems can be solved in polynomial time on a quantum computer
with a small probability of error.
    Currently, nobody knows how to build a quantum computer, although it seems as
though it might be possible within the laws of quantum mechanics. Some suggestions
have been made as to possible designs for such computers [Teich et al. 1988, Lloyd 1993,
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                         5


1994, Cirac and Zoller 1995, DiVincenzo 1995, Sleator and Weinfurter 1995, Barenco et
al. 1995b, Chuang and Yamomoto 1995], but there will be substantial difficulty in build-
ing any of these [Landauer 1995a, Landauer 1995b, Unruh 1995, Chuang et al. 1995,
Palma et al. 1995]. The most difficult obstacles appear to involve the decoherence of
quantum superpositions through the interaction of the computer with the environment,
and the implementation of quantum state transformations with enough precision to give
accurate results after many computation steps. Both of these obstacles become more
difficult as the size of the computer grows, so it may turn out to be possible to build
small quantum computers, while scaling up to machines large enough to do interesting
computations may present fundamental difficulties.
    Even if no useful quantum computer is ever built, this research does illuminate
the problem of simulating quantum mechanics on a classical computer. Any method of
doing this for an arbitrary Hamiltonian would necessarily be able to simulate a quantum
computer. Thus, any general method for simulating quantum mechanics with at most
a polynomial slowdown would lead to a polynomial-time algorithm for factoring.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In §2, we introduce the model of
quantum computation, the quantum gate array, that we use in the rest of the paper.
In §§3 and 4, we explain two subroutines that are used in our algorithms: reversible
modular exponentiation in §3 and quantum Fourier transforms in §4. In §5, we give
our algorithm for prime factorization, and in §6, we give our algorithm for extracting
discrete logarithms. In §7, we give a brief discussion of the practicality of quantum
computation and suggest possible directions for further work.


2    Quantum computation
In this section we give a brief introduction to quantum computation, emphasizing the
properties that we will use. We will describe only quantum gate arrays, or quantum
acyclic circuits, which are analogous to acyclic circuits in classical computer science.
For other models of quantum computers, see references on quantum Turing machines
[Deutsch 1989, Bernstein and Vazirani 1993, Yao 1993] and quantum cellular automata
[Feynman 1986, Margolus 1986, 1990, Lloyd 1993, Biafore 1994]. If they are allowed
a small probability of error, quantum Turing machines and quantum gate arrays can
compute the same functions in polynomial time [Yao 1993]. This may also be true for
the various models of quantum cellular automata, but it has not yet been proved. This
gives evidence that the class of functions computable in quantum polynomial time with
a small probability of error is robust, in that it does not depend on the exact architecture
of a quantum computer. By analogy with the classical class BPP, this class is called
BQP.
    Consider a system with n components, each of which can have two states. Whereas
in classical physics, a complete description of the state of this system requires only n
bits, in quantum physics, a complete description of the state of this system requires
2n − 1 complex numbers. To be more precise, the state of the quantum system is a
point in a 2n -dimensional vector space. For each of the 2n possible classical positions
of the components, there is a basis state of this vector space which we represent, for
example, by |011 · · · 0i meaning that the first bit is 0, the second bit is 1, and so on.
Here, the ket notation |xi means that x is a (pure) quantum state. (Mixed states will
6                                                                              P. W. SHOR


not be discussed in this paper, and thus we do not define them; see a quantum theory
book such as Peres [1993] for this definition.) The Hilbert space associated with this
quantum system is the complex vector space with these 2n states as basis vectors, and
the state of the system at any time is represented by a unit-length vector in this Hilbert
space. As multiplying this state vector by a unit-length complex phase does not change
any behavior of the state, we need only 2n − 1 complex numbers to completely describe
the state. We represent this superposition of states as
                                         n
                                        2X −1
                                                ai |Si i ,                             (2.1)
                                         i=0
                                                               P        2
where the amplitudes ai are complex numbers such that            i |ai | = 1 and each |Si i
is a basis vector of the Hilbert space. If the machine is measured (with respect to
this basis) at any particular step, the probability of seeing basis state |Si i is |ai |2 ;
however, measuring the state of the machine projects this state to the observed basis
vector |Si i. Thus, looking at the machine during the computation will invalidate the
rest of the computation. In this paper, we only consider measurements with respect
to the canonical basis. This does not greatly restrict our model of computation, since
measurements in other reasonable bases could be simulated by first using quantum
computation to perform a change of basis and then performing a measurement in the
canonical basis.
    In order to use a physical system for computation, we must be able to change the
state of the system. The laws of quantum mechanics permit only unitary transforma-
tions of state vectors. A unitary matrix is one whose conjugate transpose is equal to
its inverse, and requiring state transformations to be represented by unitary matrices
ensures that summing the probabilities of obtaining every possible outcome will result
in 1. The definition of quantum circuits (and quantum Turing machines) only allows
local unitary transformations; that is, unitary transformations on a fixed number of
bits. This is physically justified because, given a general unitary transformation on n
bits, it is not at all clear how one would efficiently implement it physically, whereas
two-bit transformations can at least in theory be implemented by relatively simple
physical systems [Cirac and Zoller 1995, DiVincenzo 1995, Sleator and Weinfurter 1995,
Chuang and Yamomoto 1995]. While general n-bit transformations can always be
built out of two-bit transformations [DiVincenzo 1995, Sleator and Weinfurter 1995,
Lloyd 1995, Deutsch et al. 1995], the number required will often be exponential in n
[Barenco et al. 1995a]. Thus, the set of two-bit transformations form a set of building
blocks for quantum circuits in a manner analogous to the way a universal set of classical
gates (such as the AND, OR and NOT gates) form a set of building blocks for classical
circuits. In fact, for a universal set of quantum gates, it is sufficient to take all one-bit
gates and a single type of two-bit gate, the controlled NOT, which negates the second
bit if and only if the first bit is 1.
    Perhaps an example will be informative at this point. A quantum gate can be
expressed as a truth table: for each input basis vector we need to give the output of the
gate. One such gate is:
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                        7



                                  |00i → |00i
                                  |01i → |01i                                         (2.2)
                                  |10i → √12 (|10i + |11i)
                                  |11i →    √1 (|10i − |11i).
                                              2

Not all truth tables correspond to physically feasible quantum gates, as many truth
tables will not give rise to unitary transformations.
   The same gate can also be represented as a matrix. The rows correspond to input
basis vectors. The columns correspond to output basis vectors. The (i, j) entry gives,
when the ith basis vector is input to the gate, the coefficient of the jth basis vector in
the corresponding output of the gate. The truth table above would then correspond to
the following matrix:

                                    |00i |01i |10i  |11i
                           |00i       1    0    0     0
                           |01i       0    1    0     0                               (2.3)
                                                1     1
                           |10i       0    0   √
                                                 2
                                                     √
                                                       2
                                                1     1
                           |11i       0    0   √
                                                 2
                                                   − √2         .

A quantum gate is feasible if and only if the corresponding matrix is unitary, i.e., its
inverse is its conjugate transpose.
   Suppose our machine is in the superposition of states

                                      √1 |10i − √1 |11i                               (2.4)
                                        2         2

and we apply the unitary transformation represented by (2.2) and (2.3) to this state.
The resulting output will be the result of multiplying the vector (2.4) by the matrix
(2.3). The machine will thus go to the superposition of states
                        1                 1
                        2 (|10i + |11i) − 2 (|10i − |11i)   = |11i .                  (2.5)

This example shows the potential effects of interference on quantum computation. Had
we started with either the state |10i or the state |11i, there would have been a chance of
observing the state |10i after the application of the gate (2.3). However, when we start
with a superposition of these two states, the probability amplitudes for the state |10i
cancel, and we have no possibility of observing |10i after the application of the gate.
Notice that the output of the gate would have been |10i instead of |11i had we started
with the superposition of states

                                      √1 |10i + √1 |11i                               (2.6)
                                        2         2

which has the same probabilities of being in any particular configuration if it is observed
as does the superposition (2.4).
    If we apply a gate to only two bits of a longer basis vector (now our circuit must have
more than two wires), we multiply the gate matrix by the two bits to which the gate is
8                                                                             P. W. SHOR


applied, and leave the other bits alone. This corresponds to multiplying the whole state
by the tensor product of the gate matrix on those two bits with the identity matrix on
the remaining bits.
    A quantum gate array is a set of quantum gates with logical “wires” connecting their
inputs and outputs. The input to the gate array, possibly along with extra work bits
that are initially set to 0, is fed through a sequence of quantum gates. The values of
the bits are observed after the last quantum gate, and these values are the output. To
compare gate arrays with quantum Turing machines, we need to add conditions that
make gate arrays a uniform complexity class. In other words, because there is a different
gate array for each size of input, we need to keep the designer of the gate arrays from
hiding non-computable (or hard to compute) information in the arrangement of the
gates. To make quantum gate arrays uniform, we must add two things to the definition
of gate arrays. The first is the standard requirement that the design of the gate array
be produced by a polynomial-time (classical) computation. The second requirement
should be a standard part of the definition of analog complexity classes, although since
analog complexity classes have not been widely studied, this requirement is much less
widely known. This requirement is that the entries in the unitary matrices describing
the gates must be computable numbers. Specifically, the first log n bits of each entry
should be classically computable in time polynomial in n [Solovay 1995]. This keeps
non-computable (or hard to compute) information from being hidden in the bits of the
amplitudes of the quantum gates.


3    Reversible logic and modular exponentiation
The definition of quantum gate arrays gives rise to completely reversible computation.
That is, knowing the quantum state on the wires leading out of a gate tells uniquely
what the quantum state must have been on the wires leading into that gate. This is a
reflection of the fact that, despite the macroscopic arrow of time, the laws of physics ap-
pear to be completely reversible. This would seem to imply that anything built with the
laws of physics must be completely reversible; however, classical computers get around
this fact by dissipating energy and thus making their computations thermodynamically
irreversible. This appears impossible to do for quantum computers because superpo-
sitions of quantum states need to be maintained throughout the computation. Thus,
quantum computers necessarily have to use reversible computation. This imposes ex-
tra costs when doing classical computations on a quantum computer, as is sometimes
necessary in subroutines of quantum computations.
    Because of the reversibility of quantum computation, a deterministic computation
is performable on a quantum computer only if it is reversible. Luckily, it has already
been shown that any deterministic computation can be made reversible [Lecerf 1963,
Bennett 1973]. In fact, reversible classical gate arrays have been studied. Much like
the result that any classical computation can be done using NAND gates, there are also
universal gates for reversible computation. Two of these are Toffoli gates [Toffoli 1980]
and Fredkin gates [Fredkin and Toffoli 1982]; these are illustrated in Table 3.1.
    The Toffoli gate is just a controlled controlled NOT, i.e., the last bit is negated if
and only if the first two bits are 1. In a Toffoli gate, if the third input bit is set to 1,
then the third output bit is the NAND of the first two input bits. Since NAND is a
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                          9



                    Table 3.1: Truth tables for Toffoli and Fredkin gates.
                       Toffoli Gate                           Fredkin Gate

                   INPUT       OUTPUT                      INPUT      OUTPUT
               0     0   0     0  0 0                  0     0   0    0  0 0
               0     0   1     0  0 1                  0     0   1    0  1 0
               0     1   0     0  1 0                  0     1   0    0  0 1
               0     1   1     0  1 1                  0     1   1    0  1 1
               1     0   0     1  0 0                  1     0   0    1  0 0
               1     0   1     1  0 1                  1     0   1    1  0 1
               1     1   0     1  1 1                  1     1   0    1  1 0
               1     1   1     1  1 0                  1     1   1    1  1 1



universal gate for classical gate arrays, this shows that the Toffoli gate is universal. In
a Fredkin gate, the last two bits are swapped if the first bit is 0, and left untouched if
the first bit is 1. For a Fredkin gate, if the third input bit is set to 0, the second output
bit is the AND of the first two input bits; and if the last two input bits are set to 0
and 1 respectively, the second output bit is the NOT of the first input bit. Thus, both
AND and NOT gates are realizable using Fredkin gates, showing that the Fredkin gate
is universal.
    From results on reversible computation [Lecerf 1963, Bennett 1973], we can compute
any polynomial time function F (x) as long as we keep the input x in the computer. We do
this by adapting the method for computing the function F non-reversibly. These results
can easily be extended to work for gate arrays [Toffoli 1980, Fredkin and Toffoli 1982].
When AND, OR or NOT gates are changed to Fredkin or Toffoli gates, one obtains
both additional input bits, which must be preset to specified values, and additional
output bits, which contain the information needed to reverse the computation. While
the additional input bits do not present difficulties in designing quantum computers,
the additional output bits do, because unless they are all reset to 0, they will affect the
interference patterns in quantum computation. Bennett’s method for resetting these bits
to 0 is shown in the top half of Table 3.2. A non-reversible gate array may thus be turned
into a reversible gate array as follows. First, duplicate the input bits as many times as
necessary (since each input bit could be used more than once by the gate array). Next,
keeping one copy of the input around, use Toffoli and Fredkin gates to simulate non-
reversible gates, putting the extra output bits into the RECORD register. These extra
output bits preserve enough of a record of the operations to enable the computation of
the gate array to be reversed. Once the output F (x) has been computed, copy it into a
register that has been preset to zero, and then undo the computation to erase both the
first OUTPUT register and the RECORD register.
    To erase x and replace it with F (x), in addition to a polynomial-time algorithm for F ,
we also need a polynomial-time algorithm for computing x from F (x); i.e., we need that
F is one-to-one and that both F and F −1 are polynomial-time computable. The method
for this computation is given in the whole of Table 3.2. There are two stages to this
computation. The first is the same as before, taking x to (x, F (x)). For the second
stage, shown in the bottom half of Table 3.2, note that if we have a method to compute
F −1 non-reversibly in polynomial time, we can use the same technique to reversibly map
F (x) to (F (x), F −1 (F (x))) = (F (x), x). However, since this is a reversible computation,
10                                                                             P. W. SHOR



           Table 3.2: Bennett’s method for making a computation reversible.
             INPUT              ------             ------            ------
             INPUT              OUTPUT             RECORD(F )        ------
             INPUT              OUTPUT             RECORD(F )        OUTPUT
             INPUT              ------             ------            OUTPUT
             INPUT              INPUT              RECORD(F −1 )     OUTPUT
             ------             INPUT              RECORD(F −1 )     OUTPUT
             ------             ------             ------            OUTPUT




we can reverse it to go from (x, F (x)) to F (x). Put together, these two pieces take x to
F (x).
    The above discussion shows that computations can be made reversible for only a
constant factor cost in time, but the above method uses as much space as it does time.
If the classical computation requires much less space than time, then making it reversible
in this manner will result in a large increase in the space required. There are methods
that do not use as much space, but use more time, to make computations reversible
[Bennett 1989, Levine and Sherman 1990]. While there is no general method that does
not cause an increase in either space or time, specific algorithms can sometimes be
made reversible without paying a large penalty in either space or time; at the end of this
section we will show how to do this for modular exponentiation, which is a subroutine
necessary for quantum factoring.
    The bottleneck in the quantum factoring algorithm; i.e., the piece of the fac-
toring algorithm that consumes the most time and space, is modular exponentia-
tion. The modular exponentiation problem is, given n, x, and r, find xr (mod n).
The best classical method for doing this is to repeatedly square of x (mod n) to
       i
get x2 (mod n) for i ≤ log2 r, and then multiply a subset of these powers (mod n)
to get xr (mod n). If we are working with l-bit numbers, this requires O(l) squar-
ings and multiplications of l-bit numbers (mod n). Asymptotically, the best clas-
sical result for gate arrays for multiplication is the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm
[Schönhage and Strassen 1971, Knuth 1981, Schönhage 1982]. This gives a gate array
for integer multiplication that uses O(l log l log log l) gates to multiply two l-bit numbers.
Thus, asymptotically, modular exponentiation requires O(l2 log l log log l) time. Making
this reversible would naı̈vely cost the same amount in space; however, one can reuse the
space used in the repeated squaring part of the algorithm, and thus reduce the amount
of space needed to essentially that required for multiplying two l-bit numbers; one simple
method for reducing this space (although not the most versatile one) will be given later
in this section. Thus, modular exponentiation can be done in O(l2 log l log log l) time
and O(l log l log log l) space.
    While the Schönhage–Strassen algorithm is the best multiplication algorithm discov-
ered to date for large l, it does not scale well for small l. For small numbers, the best
gate arrays for multiplication essentially use elementary-school longhand multiplication
in binary. This method requires O(l2 ) time to multiply two l-bit numbers, and thus
modular exponentiation requires O(l3 ) time with this method. These gate arrays can
be made reversible, however, using only O(l) space.
    We will now give the method for constructing a reversible gate array that takes only
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                    11


O(l) space and O(l3 ) time to compute (a, xa (mod n)) from a, where a, x, and n are
l-bit numbers. The basic building block used is a gate array that takes b as input and
outputs b + c (mod n). Note that here b is the gate array’s input but c and n are built
into the structure of the gate array. Since addition (mod n) is computable in O(log n)
time classically, this reversible gate array can be made with only O(log n) gates and
O(log n) work bits using the techniques explained earlier in this section.
    The technique we use for computing xa (mod n) is essentially the same as the classi-
                                                        i
cal method. First, by repeated squaring we compute x2 (mod n) for all i < l. Then, to
                                               i
obtain xa (mod n) we multiply the powers x2 (mod n) where 2i appears in the binary
expansion of a. In our algorithm for factoring n, we only need to compute xa (mod n)
where a is in a superposition of states, but x is some fixed integer. This makes things
much easier, because we can use a reversible gate array where a is treated as input,
but where x and n are built into the structure of the gate array. Thus, we can use the
algorithm described by the following pseudocode; here, ai represents the ith bit of a in
binary, where the bits are indexed from right to left and the rightmost bit of a is a0 .

          power := 1
          for i = 0 to l −1
              if ( ai == 1 ) then
                                      i
                  power := power ∗ x 2 (mod n)
              endif
          endfor

The variable a is left unchanged by the code and xa (mod n) is output as the variable
power . Thus, this code takes the pair of values (a, 1) to (a, xa (mod n)).
    This pseudocode can easily be turned into a gate array; the only hard part of this
                                                                  i
is the fourth line, where we multiply the variable power by x2 (mod n); to do this we
                                                                               i
need to use a fairly complicated gate array as a subroutine. Recall that x2 (mod n)
can be computed classically and then built into the structure of the gate array. Thus,
to implement this line, we need a reversible gate array that takes b as input and gives
bc (mod n) as output, where the structure of the gate array can depend on c and n.
Of course, this step can only be reversible if gcd(c, n) = 1, i.e., if c and n have no
common factors, as otherwise two distinct values of b will be mapped to the same value
of bc (mod n); this case is fortunately all we need for the factoring algorithm. We will
show how to build this gate array in two stages. The first stage is directly analogous
to exponentiation by repeated multiplication; we obtain multiplication from repeated
addition (mod n). Pseudocode for this stage is as follows.

          result := 0
          for i = 0 to l −1
               if ( bi == 1 ) then
                   result := result + 2i c (mod n)
               endif
          endfor

Again, 2i c (mod n) can be precomputed and built into the structure of the gate array.
12                                                                           P. W. SHOR


    The above pseudocode takes b as input, and gives (b, bc (mod n)) as output. To
get the desired result, we now need to erase b. Recall that gcd(c, n) = 1, so there is
a c−1 (mod n) with c c−1 ≡ 1 (mod n). Multiplication by this c−1 could be used to
reversibly take bc (mod n) to (bc (mod n), bcc−1 (mod n)) = (bc (mod n), b). This is
just the reverse of the operation we want, and since we are working with reversible
computing, we can turn this operation around to erase b. The pseudocode for this
follows.

           for i = 0 to l −1
               if ( result i == 1 ) then
                   b := b − 2i c−1 (mod n)
               endif
           endfor

As before, result i is the ith bit of result.
    Note that at this stage of the computation, b should be 0. However, we did not set b
directly to zero, as this would not have been a reversible operation and thus impossible on
a quantum computer, but instead we did a relatively complicated sequence of operations
which ended with b = 0 and which in fact depended on multiplication being a group
(mod n). At this point, then, we could do something somewhat sneaky: we could
measure b to see if it actually is 0. If it is not, we know that there has been an error
somewhere in the quantum computation, i.e., that the results are worthless and we
should stop the computer and start over again. However, if we do find that b is 0,
then we know (because we just observed it) that it is now exactly 0. This measurement
thus may bring the quantum computation back on track in that any amplitude that b
had for being non-zero has been eliminated. Further, because the probability that we
observe a state is proportional to the square of the amplitude of that state, depending
on the error model, doing the modular exponentiation and measuring b every time that
we know that it should be 0 may have a higher probability of overall success than the
same computation done without the repeated measurements of b; this is the quantum
watchdog (or quantum Zeno) effect [Peres 1993]. The argument above does not actually
show that repeated measurement of b is indeed beneficial, because there is a cost (in time,
if nothing else) of measuring b. Before this is implemented, then, it should be checked
with analysis or experiment that the benefit of such measurements exceeds their cost.
However, I believe that partial measurements such as this one are a promising way of
trying to stabilize quantum computations.
    Currently, Schönhage–Strassen is the algorithm of choice for multiplying very large
numbers, and longhand multiplication is the algorithm of choice for small numbers.
There are also multiplication algorithms which have efficiencies between these two al-
gorithms, and which are the best algorithms to use for intermediate length numbers
[Karatsuba and Ofman 1962, Knuth 1981, Schönhage et al. 1994]. It is not clear which
algorithms are best for which size numbers. While this may be known to some extent
for classical computation [Schönhage et al. 1994], using data on which algorithms work
better on classical computers could be misleading for two reasons: First, classical com-
puters need not be reversible, and the cost of making an algorithm reversible depends
on the algorithm. Second, existing computers generally have multiplication for 32- or
64-bit numbers built into their hardware, and this will increase the optimal changeover
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                           13


points to asymptotically faster algorithms; further, some multiplication algorithms can
take better advantage of this hardwired multiplication than others. Thus, in order to
program quantum computers most efficiently, work needs to be done on the best way of
implementing elementary arithmetic operations on quantum computers. One tantalizing
fact is that the Schönhage–Strassen fast multiplication algorithm uses the fast Fourier
transform, which is also the basis for all the fast algorithms on quantum computers
discovered to date; it is tempting to speculate that integer multiplication itself might be
speeded up by a quantum algorithm; if possible, this would result in a somewhat faster
asymptotic bound for factoring on a quantum computer, and indeed could even make
breaking RSA on a quantum computer asymptotically faster than encrypting with RSA
on a classical computer.


4     Quantum Fourier transforms
Since quantum computation deals with unitary transformations, it is helpful to be able
to build certain useful unitary transformations. In this section we give a technique for
constructing in polynomial time on quantum computers one particular unitary transfor-
mation, which is essentially a discrete Fourier transform. This transformation will be
given as a matrix, with both rows and columns indexed by states. These states corre-
spond to binary representations of integers on the computer; in particular, the rows and
columns will be indexed beginning with 0 unless otherwise specified.
   This transformations is as follows. Consider a number a with 0 ≤ a < q for some q
where the number of bits of q is polynomial. We will perform the transformation that
takes the state |ai to the state
                                     q−1
                                   1 X
                                              |ci exp(2πiac/q).                          (4.1)
                                  q 1/2 c=0
                                                            1
That is, we apply the unitary matrix whose (a, c) entry is q1/2 exp(2πiac/q). This Fourier
transform is at the heart of our algorithms, and we call this matrix Aq .
    Since we will use Aq for q of exponential size, we must show how this transformation
can be done in polynomial time. In this paper, we will give a simple construction for Aq
when q is a power of 2 that was discovered independently by Coppersmith [1994] and
Deutsch [see Ekert and Jozsa 1995]. This construction is essentially the standard fast
Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm [Knuth 1981] adapted for a quantum computer; the
following description of it follows that of Ekert and Jozsa [1995]. In the earlier version
of this paper [Shor 1994], we gave a construction for Aq when q was in the special class
of smooth numbers with small prime power factors. In fact, Cleve [1994] has shown how
to construct Aq for all smooth numbers q whose prime factors are at most O(log n).
    Take q = 2l , and let us represent an integer a in binary as |al−1 al−2 . . . a0 i. For the
quantum Fourier transform Aq , we only need to use two types of quantum gates. These
gates are Rj , which operates on the jth bit of the quantum computer:

                                                  |0i    |1i
                               Rj =      |0i      √1      √1                             (4.2)
                                                    2       2
                                         |1i      √1    − √12     ,
                                                    2
14                                                                                  P. W. SHOR


and Sj,k , which operates on the bits in positions j and k with j < k:
                                             |00i |01i |10i |11i
                                   |00i        1    0    0     0
                        Sj,k =     |01i        0    1    0     0                             (4.3)
                                   |10i        0    0    1     0
                                   |11i        0    0    0  eiθk−j       ,
where θk−j = π/2k−j . To perform a quantum Fourier transform, we apply the matrices
in the order (from left to right)
     Rl−1 Sl−2,l−1 Rl−2 Sl−3,l−1 Sl−3,l−2 Rl−3 . . . R1 S0,l−1 S0,l−2 . . . S0,2 S0,1 R0 ;   (4.4)
that is, we apply the gates Rj in reverse order from Rl−1 to R0 , and between Rj+1 and
Rj we apply all the gates Sj,k where k > j. For example, on 3 bits, the matrices would
be applied in the order R2 S1,2 R1 S0,2 S0,1 R0 . To take the Fourier transform Aq when
q = 2l , we thus need to use l(l − 1)/2 quantum gates.
     Applying   this sequence of transformations will result in a quantum state
  1
      P
q 1/2   b exp(2πiac/q)  |bi, where b is the bit-reversal of c, i.e., the binary number ob-
tained by reading the bits of c from right to left. Thus, to obtain the actual quantum
Fourier transform, we need either to do further computation to reverse the bits of |bi
to obtain |ci, or to leave these bits in place and read them in reverse order; either
alternative is easy to implement.
     To show that this operation actually performs a quantum Fourier transform, consider
the amplitude
      √          of going from |ai = |al−1 . . . a0 i to |bi = |bl−1 . . . b0 i. First, the factors
of 1/ 2 in the R matrices multiply to produce a factor of 1/q 1/2 overall; thus we need
only worry about the exp(2πiac/q) phase factor in the expression (4.1). The matrices
Sj,k do not change the values of any bits, but merely change their phases. There is thus
only one way to switch the jth bit from aj to bj , and that is to use the appropriate entry
in the matrix Rj . This entry adds π to the phase if the bits aj and bj are both 1, and
leaves it unchanged otherwise. Further, the matrix Sj,k adds π/2k−j to the phase if aj
and bk are both 1 and leaves it unchanged otherwise. Thus, the phase on the path from
|ai to |bi is
                               X                X         π
                                    πaj bj +                 aj b k .                         (4.5)
                                                        2k−j
                               0≤j<l             0≤j<k<l

This expression can be rewritten as
                                            X        π
                                                         aj b k .                            (4.6)
                                                    2k−j
                                          0≤j≤k<l

Since c is the bit-reversal of b, this expression can be further rewritten as
                                      X       π
                                              k−j
                                                  aj cl−1−k .                                (4.7)
                                            2
                                     0≤j≤k<l

Making the substitution l − k − 1 for k in this sum, we get
                                           X          2j 2k
                                                 2π         a j ck                           (4.8)
                                                       2l
                                       0≤j+k<l
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                       15


Now, since adding multiples of 2π do not affect the phase, we obtain the same phase if
we sum over all j and k less than l, obtaining
                        l−1                          l−1       l−1
                        X           2j 2k         2π X j X k
                               2π         a  c
                                            j k =        2 a j     2 ck ,             (4.9)
                                     2l           2l j=0
                       j,k=0                                   k=0


where
    Pthe   last equality follows from the distributive law of multiplication. Now, q = 2l ,
       l−1 j
a = j=0 2 aj , and similarly for c, so the above expression is equal to 2πac/q, which is
the phase for the amplitude of |ai → |ci in the transformation (4.1).
    When k − j is large in the gate Sj,k in (4.3), we are multiplying by a very small
phase factor. This would be very difficult to do accurately physically, and thus it would
be somewhat disturbing if this were necessary for quantum computation. Luckily, Cop-
persmith [1994] has shown that one can define an approximate Fourier transform that
ignores these tiny phase factors, but which approximates the Fourier transform closely
enough that it can also be used for factoring. In fact, this technique reduces the number
of quantum gates needed for the (approximate) Fourier transform considerably, as it
leaves out most of the gates Sj,k .


5    Prime factorization
It has been known since before Euclid that every integer n is uniquely decomposable
into a product of primes. Mathematicians have been interested in the question of how
to factor a number into this product of primes for nearly as long. It was only in the
1970’s, however, that researchers applied the paradigms of theoretical computer science
to number theory, and looked at the asymptotic running times of factoring algorithms
[Adleman 1994]. This has resulted in a great improvement in the efficiency of factoring
algorithms. The best factoring algorithm asymptotically is currently the number field
sieve [Lenstra et al. 1990, Lenstra and Lenstra 1993], which in order to factor an inte-
ger n takes asymptotic running time exp(c(log n)1/3 (log log n)2/3 ) for some constant c.
Since the input, n, is only log n bits in length, this algorithm is an exponential-time
algorithm. Our quantum factoring algorithm takes asymptotically O((log n)2 (log log n)
(log log log n)) steps on a quantum computer, along with a polynomial (in log n) amount
of post-processing time on a classical computer that is used to convert the output of
the quantum computer to factors of n. While this post-processing could in principle be
done on a quantum computer, there is no reason not to use a classical computer if they
are more efficient in practice.
    Instead of giving a quantum computer algorithm for factoring n directly, we give a
quantum computer algorithm for finding the order of an element x in the multiplicative
group (mod n); that is, the least integer r such that xr ≡ 1 (mod n). It is known that
using randomization, factorization can be reduced to finding the order of an element
[Miller 1976]; we now briefly give this reduction.
    To find a factor of an odd number n, given a method for computing the order r
of x, choose a random x (mod n), find its order r, and compute gcd(xr/2 − 1, n). Here,
gcd(a, b) is the greatest common divisor of a and b, i.e., the largest integer that divides
both a and b. The Euclidean algorithm [Knuth 1981] can be used to compute gcd(a, b)
in polynomial time. Since (xr/2 − 1)(xr/2 + 1) = xr − 1 ≡ 0 (mod n), the gcd(xr/2 − 1, n)
16                                                                                P. W. SHOR


fails to be a non-trivial divisor of n only if r is odd or if xr/2 ≡ −1 (mod n). Using this
criterion, it can be shown that this procedure, when applied to a random x (mod n),
yields a factor of n with probability at least 1−1/2k−1 , where k is the number of distinct
odd Q prime factors of n. A brief sketch of the proof of this result follows. Suppose that
        k
n = i=1 pai i . Let ri be the order of x (mod pai i ). Then r is the least common multiple
of all the ri . Consider the largest power of 2 dividing each ri . The algorithm only fails
if all of these powers of 2 agree: if they are all 1, then r is odd and r/2 does not exist; if
they are all equal and larger than 1, then xr/2 ≡ −1 (mod n) since xr/2 ≡ −1 (mod pα      i )
                                                                                           i


for every i. By the Chinese remainder theorem [Knuth 1981, Hardy and Wright 1979,
Theorem 121], choosing an x (mod n) at random is the same as choosing for each i a
number xi (mod pai i ) at random, where pai i is the ith prime power factor of n. The
multiplicative group (mod pα ) for any odd prime power pα is cyclic [Knuth 1981], so for
any odd prime power pai i , the probability is at most 1/2 of choosing an xi having any
particular power of two as the largest divisor of its order ri . Thus each of these powers
of 2 has at most a 50% probability of agreeing with the previous ones, so all k of them
agree with probability at most 1/2k−1 , and there is at least a 1 − 1/2k−1 chance that
the x we choose is good. This scheme will thus work as long as n is odd and not a prime
power; finding factors of prime powers can be done efficiently with classical methods.
    We now describe the algorithm for finding the order of x (mod n) on a quantum
computer. This algorithm will use two quantum registers which hold integers represented
in binary. There will also be some amount of workspace. This workspace gets reset to
0 after each subroutine of our algorithm, so we will not include it when we write down
the state of our machine.
    Given x and n, to find the order of x, i.e., the least r such that xr ≡ 1 (mod n), we
do the following. First, we find q, the power of 2 with n2 ≤ q < 2n2 . We will not include
n, x, or q when we write down the state of our machine, because we never change these
values. In a quantum gate array we need not even keep these values in memory, as they
can be built into the structure of the gate array.
    Next, we put the first register in the uniform superposition of states representing
numbers a (mod q). This leaves our machine in state
                                           q−1
                                         1 X
                                                    |ai |0i .                              (5.1)
                                        q 1/2 a=0

This step is relatively easy, since all it entails is putting each bit in the first register into
the superposition √12 (|0i + |1i).
    Next, we compute xa (mod n) in the second register as described in §3. Since we
keep a in the first register this can be done reversibly. This leaves our machine in the
state
                                        q−1
                                    1 X
                                            |ai |xa (mod n)i .                              (5.2)
                                  q 1/2 a=0
  We then perform our Fourier transform Aq on the first register, as described in §4,
mapping |ai to
                                 q−1
                             1 X
                                     exp(2πiac/q) |ci .                         (5.3)
                           q 1/2 c=0
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                       17


                                                                     1
That is, we apply the unitary matrix with the (a, c) entry equal to q1/2 exp(2πiac/q).
This leaves our machine in state
                          q−1 q−1
                         1 XX
                                   exp(2πiac/q) |ci |xa (mod n)i .                    (5.4)
                         q a=0 c=0
    Finally, we observe the machine. It would be sufficient to observe solely the value
of |ci in the first register, but for clarity we will assume that we observe both |ci and
|xa (mod n)i. We now compute the probability that our machine ends in a particular
state c, xk (mod n) , where we may assume 0 ≤ k < r. Summing over all possible ways
to reach the state c, xk (mod n) , we find that this probability is
                                                                  2
                                     1     X
                                                     exp(2πiac/q) .                   (5.5)
                                     q
                                         a: xa ≡xk

where the sum is over all a, 0 ≤ a < q, such that xa ≡ xk (mod n). Because the order
of x is r, this sum is over all a satisfying a ≡ k (mod r). Writing a = br + k, we find
that the above probability is
                                                                          2
                               ⌊(q−k−1)/r⌋
                           1         X
                                                exp(2πi(br + k)c/q) .                 (5.6)
                           q
                                     b=0

We can ignore the term of exp(2πikc/q), as it can be factored out of the sum and has
magnitude 1. We can also replace rc with {rc}q , where {rc}q is the residue which is
congruent to rc (mod q) and is in the range −q/2 < {rc}q ≤ q/2. This leaves us with
the expression
                                                                      2
                                   ⌊(q−k−1)/r⌋
                               1         X
                                                     exp(2πib{rc}q /q) .              (5.7)
                               q
                                         b=0

We will now show that if {rc}q is small enough, all the amplitudes in this sum will be
in nearly the same direction (i.e., have close to the same phase), and thus make the sum
large. Turning the sum into an integral, we obtain
       Z q−k−1
     1 ⌊ r ⌋                                                                   
                 exp(2πib{rc}q /q)db + O ⌊(q−k−1)/r⌋
                                                   q     (exp(2πi{rc} q /q) − 1)  . (5.8)
     q 0
If |{rc}q | ≤ r/2, the error term in the above expression is easily seen to be bounded by
O(1/q). We now show that if |{rc}q | ≤ r/2, the above integral is large, so the probability
of obtaining a state c, xk (mod n) is large. Note that this condition depends only on
c and is independent of k. Substituting u = rb/q in the above integral, we get
                                Z r q−k−1
                              1 q⌊ r ⌋        
                                                   {rc}
                                                         
                                           exp 2πi r q u du.                         (5.9)
                              r 0
Since k < r, approximating the upper limit of integration by 1 results in only a O(1/q)
error in the above expression. If we do this, we obtain the integral
                                1 1
                                  Z                
                                               {rc}
                                     exp 2πi r q u du.                            (5.10)
                                r 0
18                                                                          P. W. SHOR




             0.12

             0.10

             0.08

     P       0.06

             0.04

             0.02

             0.00
                      0      32   64     96     128    160     192    224    256
                                                 c




Figure 5.1: The probability P of observing values of c between 0 and 255, given q = 256
and r = 10.

Letting {rc}q /r vary between − 21 and 12 , the absolute magnitude of the integral (5.10)
is easily seen to be minimized when {rc}q /r = ± 21 , in which case the absolute value
of expression (5.10) is 2/(πr). The square of this quantity is a lower bound on the
probability that we see any particular state c, xk (mod n) with {rc}q ≤ r/2; this
probability is thus asymptotically bounded below by 4/(π 2 r2 ), and so is at least 1/3r2
for sufficiently large n.
    The probability of seeing a given state c, xk (mod n) will thus be at least 1/3r2 if

                                   −r          r
                                      ≤ {rc}q ≤ ,                                  (5.11)
                                   2           2
i.e., if there is a d such that
                                 −r             r
                                     ≤ rc − dq ≤ .                                 (5.12)
                                  2             2
Dividing by rq and rearranging the terms gives

                                       c d    1
                                         −   ≤ .                                   (5.13)
                                       q   r  2q

We know c and q. Because q > n2 , there is at most one fraction d/r with r < n that
satisfies the above inequality. Thus, we can obtain the fraction d/r in lowest terms by
rounding c/q to the nearest fraction having a denominator smaller than n. This fraction
can be found in polynomial time by using a continued fraction expansion of c/q, which
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                               19


finds all the best approximations of c/q by fractions [Hardy and Wright 1979, Chapter
X, Knuth 1981].
     The exact probabilities as given by equation (5.7) for an example case with r = 10
and q = 256 are plotted in Figure 5.1. The value r = 10 could occur when factoring 33
if x were chosen to be 5, for example. Here q is taken smaller than 332 so as to make the
values of c in the plot distinguishable; this does not change the functional structure of
P(c). Note that with high probability the observed value of c is near an integral multiple
of q/r = 256/10.
     If we have the fraction d/r in lowest terms, and if d happens to be relatively prime
to r, this will give us r. We will now count the number of states c, xk (mod n) which
enable us to compute r in this way. There are φ(r) possible values of d relatively prime
to r, where φ is Euler’s totient function [Knuth 1981, Hardy and Wright 1979, §5.5].
Each of these fractions d/r is close to one fraction c/q with |c/q − d/r| ≤ 1/2q. There
are also r possible values for xk , since r is the order of x. Thus, there are rφ(r) states
 c, xk (mod n) which would enable us to obtain r. Since each of these states occurs
with probability at least 1/3r2 , we obtain r with probability at least φ(r)/3r. Using
the theorem that φ(r)/r > δ/ log log r for some constant δ [Hardy and Wright 1979,
Theorem 328], this shows that we find r at least a δ/ log log r fraction of the time, so by
repeating this experiment only O(log log r) times, we are assured of a high probability
of success.
     In practice, assuming that quantum computation is more expensive than classical
computation, it would be worthwhile to alter the above algorithm so as to perform less
quantum computation and more postprocessing. First, if the observed state is |ci, it
would be wise to also try numbers close to c such as c ± 1, c ± 2, . . ., since these also
have a reasonable chance of being close to a fraction qd/r. Second, if c/q ≈ d/r, and
d and r have a common factor, it is likely to be small. Thus, if the observed value of
c/q is rounded off to d′ /r′ in lowest terms, for a candidate r one should consider not
only r′ but also its small multiples 2r′ , 3r′ , . . . , to see if these are the actual order of x.
Although the first technique will only reduce the expected number of trials required to
find r by a constant factor, the second technique will reduce the expected number of
trials for the hardest n from O(log log n) to O(1) if the first (log n)1+ǫ multiples of r′ are
considered [Odylzko 1995]. A third technique is, if two candidate r’s have been found,
say r1 and r2 , to test the least common multiple of r1 and r2 as a candidate r. This third
technique is also able to reduce the expected number of trials to a constant [Knill 1995],
and will also work in some cases where the first two techniques fail.
     Note that in this algorithm for determining the order of an element, we did not use
many of the properties of multiplication (mod n). In fact, if we have a permutation
f mapping the set {0, 1, 2, . . . , n − 1} into itself such that its kth iterate, f (k) (a), is
computable in time polynomial in log n and log k, the same algorithm will be able to
find the order of an element a under f , i.e., the minimum r such that f (r) (a) = a.


6     Discrete logarithms
For every prime p, the multiplicative group (mod p) is cyclic, that is, there are generators
g such that 1, g, g 2 , . . . , g p−2 comprise all the non-zero residues (mod p) [Hardy and
Wright 1979, Theorem 111, Knuth 1981]. Suppose we are given a prime p and such
20                                                                                       P. W. SHOR


a generator g. The discrete logarithm of a number x with respect to p and g is the
integer r with 0 ≤ r < p − 1 such that g r ≡ x (mod p). The fastest algorithm known for
finding discrete logarithms modulo arbitrary primes p is Gordon’s [1993] adaptation of
the number field sieve, which runs in time exp(O(log p)1/3 (log log p)2/3 )). We show how
to find discrete logarithms on a quantum computer with two modular exponentiations
and two quantum Fourier transforms.
    This algorithm will use three quantum registers. We first find q a power of 2 such
that q is close to p, i.e., with p < q < 2p. Next, we put the first two registers in our
quantum computer in the uniform superposition of all |ai and |bi (mod p − 1), and
compute g a x−b (mod p) in the third register. This leaves our machine in the state
                                 p−2 p−2
                             1 XX
                                         a, b, g a x−b (mod p) .                               (6.1)
                           p − 1 a=0
                                          b=0

As before, we use the Fourier transform Aq to send |ai → |ci and |bi → |di with
probability amplitude q1 exp(2πi(ac + bd)/q). This is, we take the state |a, bi to the state

                                q−1 q−1
                               1 XX               2πi
                                                               
                                     exp           q (ac + bd)     |c, di .                    (6.2)
                               q c=0
                                      d=0

This leaves our quantum computer in the state
                       p−2      q−1
                 1     X        X
                                                2πi
                                                               c, d, g a x−b (mod p) .
                                                           
                                        exp      q (ac + bd)                                   (6.3)
              (p − 1)q
                       a,b=0    c,d=0

Finally, we observe the state of the quantum computer.
   The probability of observing a state |c, d, yi with y ≡ g k (mod p) is
                                                                              2

                              1     X                   
                                        exp 2πi
                                             q  (ac + bd)                                      (6.4)
                           (p − 1)q a,b
                                         a−rb≡k



where the sum is over all (a, b) such that a − rb ≡ k (mod p − 1). Note that we now
have two moduli to deal with, p − 1 and q. While this makes keeping track of things
more confusing, it does not pose serious problems. We now use the relation
                                                  j     k
                              a = br + k − (p − 1) br+k
                                                    p−1                        (6.5)

and substitute (6.5) in the expression (6.4) to obtain the amplitude on c, d, g k (mod p) ,
which is
                          p−2
                   1      X                                    j     k 
                              exp 2πi
                                    q  brc + kc + bd − c(p − 1) br+k
                                                                  p−1      .          (6.6)
                (p − 1)q
                         b=0

The absolute value of the square of this amplitude is the probability of observing the
state c, d, g k (mod p) . We will now analyze the expression (6.6). First, a factor of
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                     21


exp(2πikc/q) can be taken out of all the terms and ignored, because it does not change
the probability. Next, we split the exponent into two parts and factor out b to obtain
                                     p−2
                            1     X                       
                                    exp 2πi
                                         q  bT   exp   2πi
                                                        q  V   ,                    (6.7)
                         (p − 1)q
                                     b=0

where
                                         r
                           T = rc + d − p−1 {c(p − 1)}q ,                           (6.8)
and                                         j          k
                                      br         br+k
                           V =       p−1 −        p−1        {c(p − 1)}q .          (6.9)

Here by {z}q we mean the residue of z (mod q) with −q/2 < {z}q ≤ q/2, as in equation
(5.7).
    We next classify possible outputs (observed states) of the quantum computer into
“good” and “bad.” We will show that if we get enough “good” outputs, then we will
likely be able to deduce r, and that furthermore, the chance of getting a “good” output
is constant. The idea is that if
                                       r                                     1
                     {T }q = rc + d − p−1 {c(p − 1)}q − jq ≤                   ,   (6.10)
                                                                             2
where j is the closest integer to T /q, then as b varies between 0 and p − 2, the phase
of the first exponential term in equation (6.7) only varies over at most half of the unit
circle. Further, if
                                  |{c(p − 1)}q | ≤ q/12,                           (6.11)
then |V | is always at most q/12, so the phase of the second exponential term in equation
(6.7) never is farther than exp(πi/6) from 1. If conditions (6.10) and (6.11) both hold,
we will say that an output is “good.” We will show that if both conditions hold, then the
contribution to the probability from the corresponding term is significant. Furthermore,
both conditions will hold with constant probability, and a reasonable sample of c’s for
which condition (6.10) holds will allow us to deduce r.
    We now give a lower bound on the probability of each good output, i.e., an output
that satisfies conditions (6.10) and (6.11). We know that as b ranges from 0 to p − 2,
the phase of exp(2πibT /q) ranges from 0 to 2πiW where
                                                                   
                            p−2                r
                       W =          rc + d −       {c(p − 1)}q − jq                (6.12)
                              q              p−1
and j is as in equation (6.10). Thus, the component of the amplitude of the first
exponential in the summand of (6.7) in the direction

                                           exp (πiW )                              (6.13)

is at least cos(2π |W/2 − W b/(p − 2)|). By condition (6.11), the phase can vary by at
most πi/6 due to the second exponential exp(2πiV /q). Applying this variation in the
manner that minimizes the component in the direction (6.13), we get that the component
in this direction is at least

                           cos(2π |W/2 − W b/(p − 2)| + π6 ).                      (6.14)
22                                                                             P. W. SHOR


Thus we get that the absolute value of the amplitude (6.7) is at least
                               p−2
                        1     X
                                cos 2π |W/2 − W b/(p − 2)| + π6 .
                                                               
                                                                                      (6.15)
                     (p − 1)q
                               b=0

Replacing this sum with an integral, we get that the absolute value of this amplitude is
at least
                       2 1/2
                         Z                                
                              cos( π6 + 2π|W |u)du + O W   pq .                   (6.16)
                       q 0
From condition (6.10), |W | ≤ 21 , so the error term is O( pq1
                                                               ). As W varies between − 21
and 21 , the integral (6.16) is minimized when |W | = 21 . Thus, the probability of arriving
at a state |c, d, yi that satisfies both conditions (6.10) and (6.11) is at least
                                          Z 2π/3              !2
                                     12
                                                   cos u du        ,                  (6.17)
                                     qπ    π/6


or at least .054/q 2 > 1/(20q 2 ).
    We will now count the number of pairs (c, d) satisfying conditions (6.10) and (6.11).
The number of pairs (c, d) such that (6.10) holds is exactly the number of possible c’s,
since for every c there is exactly one d such that (6.10) holds. Unless gcd(p−1, q) is large,
the number of c’s for which (6.11) holds is approximately q/6, and even if it is large,
this number is at least q/12. Thus, there are at least q/12 pairs (c, d) satisfying both
conditions. Multiplying by p−1, which is the number of possible y’s, gives approximately
pq/12 good states |c, d, yi. Combining this calculation with the lower bound 1/(20q 2 ) on
the probability of observing each good state gives us that the probability of observing
some good state is at least p/(240q), or at least 1/480 (since q < 2p). Note that each
good c has a probability of at least (p − 1)/(20q 2 ) ≥ 1/(40q) of being observed, since
there p − 1 values of y and one value of d with which c can make a good state |c, d, yi.
    We now want to recover r from a pair c, d such that
                                                         
                    1     d        c(p − 1) − {c(p − 1)}q      1
                −     ≤ +r                                  ≤       (mod 1),          (6.18)
                   2q     q               (p − 1)q            2q

where this equation was obtained from condition (6.10) by dividing by q. The first thing
to notice is that the multiplier on r is a fraction with denominator p − 1, since q evenly
divides c(p − 1) − {c(p − 1)}q . Thus, we need only round d/q off to the nearest multiple
of 1/(p − 1) and divide (mod p − 1) by the integer

                                       c(p − 1) − {c(p − 1)}q
                                c′ =                                                  (6.19)
                                                 q
to find a candidate r. To show that the quantum calculation need only be repeated a
polynomial number of times to find the correct r requires only a few more details. The
problem is that we cannot divide by a number c′ which is not relatively prime to p − 1.
    For the discrete log algorithm, we do not know that all possible values of c′ are
generated with reasonable likelihood; we only know this about one-twelfth of them.
This additional difficulty makes the next step harder than the corresponding step in the
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                         23


algorithm for factoring. If we knew the remainder of r modulo all prime powers dividing
p − 1, we could use the Chinese remainder theorem to recover r in polynomial time. We
will only be able to prove that we can find this remainder for primes larger than 18, but
with a little extra work we will still be able to recover r.
    Recall that each good (c, d) pair is generated with probability at least 1/(20q 2), and
that at least a twelfth of the possible c’s are in a good (c, d) pair. From equation (6.19),
it follows that these c’s are mapped from c/q to c′ /(p − 1) by rounding to the nearest
integral multiple of 1/(p − 1). Further, the good c’s are exactly those in which c/q is
close to c′ /(p − 1). Thus, each good c corresponds with exactly one c′ . We would like
to show that for any prime power pα                                           ′
                                       i dividing p − 1, a random good c is unlikely to
                                         i


contain pi . If we are willing to accept a large constant for our algorithm, we can just
ignore the prime powers under 18; if we know r modulo all prime powers over 18, we can
try all possible residues for primes under 18 with only a (large) constant factor increase
in running time. Because at least one twelfth of the c’s were in a good (c, d) pair, at
least one twelfth of the c′ ’s are good. Thus, for a prime power pα                      ′
                                                                     i , a random good c is
                                                                       i

               αi                                 αi                      ′
divisible by pi with probability at most 12/pi . If we have t good c ’s, the probability
of having a prime power over 18 that divides all of them is therefore at most
                                                               t
                                        X                12
                                                                     ,                (6.20)
                                        α
                                                         pα
                                                          i
                                                            i

                                   18 < pi i (p−1)


where a|b means that a evenly divides b, so the sum is over all prime powers greater
than 18 that divide p − 1. This sum (over all integers > 18) converges for t = 2, and
goes down by at least a factor of 2/3 for each further increase of t by 1; thus for some
constant t it is less than 1/2.
     Recall that each good c′ is obtained with probability at least 1/(40q) from any
experiment. Since there are q/12 good c′ ’s, after 480t experiments, we are likely to
obtain a sample of t good c′ ’s chosen equally likely from all good c′ ’s. Thus, we will be
able to find a set of c′ ’s such that all prime powers pαi > 20 dividing p − 1 are relatively
                                                          i

                                   ′
prime to at least one of these c ’s. To obtain a polynomial time algorithm, all one need
do is try all possible sets of c′ ’s of size t; in practice, one would use an algorithm to
find sets of c′ ’s with large common factors. This set gives the residue of r for all primes
larger than 18. For each prime pi less than 18, we have at most 18 possibilities for the
residue modulo pα   i , where αi is the exponent on prime pi in the prime factorization of
                      i


p − 1. We can thus try all possibilities for residues modulo powers of primes less than 18:
for each possibility we can calculate the corresponding r using the Chinese remainder
theorem and then check to see whether it is the desired discrete logarithm.
     If one were to actually program this algorithm there are many ways in which the
efficiency could be increased over the efficiency shown in this paper. For example, the
estimate for the number of good c′ ’s is likely too low, especially since weaker conditions
than (6.10) and (6.11) should suffice. This means that the number of times the exper-
iment need be run could be reduced. It also seems improbable that the distribution of
bad values of c′ would have any relationship to primes under 18; if this is true, we need
not treat small prime powers separately.
     This algorithm does not use very many properties of Zp , so we can use the same
algorithm to find discrete logarithms over other fields such as Zpα , as long as the field
24                                                                          P. W. SHOR


has a cyclic multiplicative group. All we need is that we know the order of the generator,
and that we can multiply and take inverses of elements in polynomial time. The order
of the generator could in fact be computed using the quantum order-finding algorithm
given in §5 of this paper. Boneh and Lipton [1995] have generalized the algorithm so as
to be able to find discrete logarithms when the group is abelian but not cyclic.


7    Comments and open problems
It is currently believed that the most difficult aspect of building an actual quantum
computer will be dealing with the problems of imprecision and decoherence. It was
shown by Bennett et al. [1994] that the quantum gates need only have precision O(1/t)
in order to have a reasonable probability of completing t steps of quantum computation;
that is, there is a c such that if the amplitudes in the unitary matrices representing the
quantum gates are all perturbed by at most c/t, the quantum computer will still have a
reasonable chance of producing the desired output. Similarly, the decoherence needs to
be only polynomially small in t in order to have a reasonable probability of completing t
steps of computation successfully. This holds not only for the simple model of decoher-
ence where each bit has a fixed probability of decohering at each time step, but also for
more complicated models of decoherence which are derived from fundamental quantum
mechanical considerations [Unruh 1995, Palma et al. 1995, Chuang et al. 1995]. How-
ever, building quantum computers with high enough precision and low enough deco-
herence to accurately perform long computations may present formidable difficulties to
experimental physicists. In classical computers, error probabilities can be reduced not
only though hardware but also through software, by the use of redundancy and error-
correcting codes. The most obvious method of using redundancy in quantum computers
is ruled out by the theorem that quantum bits cannot be cloned [Peres 1993, §9-4],
but this argument does not rule out more complicated ways of reducing inaccuracy or
decoherence using software. In fact, some progress in the direction of reducing inaccu-
racy [Berthiaume et al. 1994] and decoherence [Shor 1995] has already been made. The
result of Bennett et al. [1995] that quantum bits can be faithfully transmitted over a
noisy quantum channel gives further hope that quantum computations can similarly be
faithfully carried out using noisy quantum bits and noisy quantum gates.
    Discrete logarithms and factoring are not in themselves widely useful problems. They
have only become useful because they have been found to be crucial for public-key cryp-
tography, and this application is in turn possible only because they have been presumed
to be difficult. This is also true of the generalizations of Boneh and Lipton [1995] of
these algorithms. If the only uses of quantum computation remain discrete logarithms
and factoring, it will likely become a special-purpose technique whose only raison d’être
is to thwart public key cryptosystems. However, there may be other hard problems
which could be solved asymptotically faster with quantum computers. In particular,
of interesting problems not known to be NP-complete, the problem of finding a short
vector in a lattice [Adleman 1994, Adleman and McCurley 1995] seems as if it might
potentially be amenable to solution by a quantum computer.
    In the history of computer science, however, most important problems have turned
out to be either polynomial-time or NP-complete. Thus quantum computers will likely
not become widely useful unless they can solve NP-complete problems. Solving NP-
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                                25


complete problems efficiently is a Holy Grail of theoretical computer science which very
few people expect to be possible on a classical computer. Finding polynomial-time
algorithms for solving these problems on a quantum computer would be a momentous
discovery. There are some weak indications that quantum computers are not powerful
enough to solve NP-complete problems [Bennett et al. 1994], but I do not believe that
this potentiality should be ruled out as yet.


Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jeff Lagarias for finding and fixing a critical error in the first version
of the discrete log algorithm. I would also like to thank him, David Applegate, Charles
Bennett, Gilles Brassard, Andrew Odlyzko, Dan Simon, Bob Solovay, Umesh Vazirani,
and correspondents too numerous to list, for productive discussions, for corrections to
and improvements of early drafts of this paper, and for pointers to the literature.

                                          REFERENCES


L. M. Adleman (1994), Algorithmic number theory—The complexity contribution, in Proceedings of
    the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society Press,
    Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 88–113.

L. M. Adleman and K. S. McCurley (1995), Open problems in number-theoretic complexity II, in
    Proceedings of the 1994 Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium, Ithaca, NY, May 6–9, Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science, L. M. Adleman and M.-D. Huang, eds., Springer, to appear.

A. Barenco, C. H. Bennett, R. Cleve, D. P. DiVincenzo, N. Margolus, P. Shor, T. Sleator,
    J. A. Smolin, and H. Weinfurter (1995a), Elementary gates for quantum computation, Phys.
    Rev. A, 52, pp. 3457–3467.

A. Barenco, D. Deutsch, A. Ekert, and R. Jozsa (1995b), Conditional quantum dynamics and logic
    gates, Phys. Rev. Lett., 74, pp. 4083–4086.

P. Benioff (1980), The computer as a physical system: A microscopic quantum mechanical Hamilto-
    nian model of computers as represented by Turing machines, J. Statist. Phys., 22, pp. 563–591.

      (1982a), Quantum mechanical Hamiltonian models of Turing machines, J. Statist. Phys., 29,
    pp. 515–546.

      (1982b), Quantum mechanical Hamiltonian models of Turing machines that dissipate no energy,
    Phys. Rev. Lett., 48, pp. 1581–1585.

C. H. Bennett (1973), Logical reversibility of computation, IBM J. Res. Develop., 17, pp. 525–532.

      (1989), Time/space trade-offs for reversible computation, SIAM J. Comput., 18, pp. 766–776.

C. H. Bennett, E. Bernstein, G. Brassard, and U. Vazirani (1994), Strengths and weaknesses of
    quantum computing, preprint.

C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, S. Popescu, B. Schumacher, J. A. Smolin, and W. K. Wooters
    (1995), Purification of noisy entanglement, and faithful teleportation via noisy channels, Phys.
    Rev. Lett., to appear.

E. Bernstein and U. Vazirani (1993), Quantum complexity theory, in Proceedings of the 25th Annual
    ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, ACM, New York, pp. 11–20.
26                                                                                  P. W. SHOR


A. Berthiaume and G. Brassard (1992a), The quantum challenge to structural complexity theory, in
    Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Structure in Complexity Theory Conference, IEEE Computer
    Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 132–137.

       (1992b), Oracle quantum computing, in Proceedings of the Workshop on Physics of Computation:
     PhysComp ’92, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 195–199.

A. Berthiaume, D. Deutsch, and R. Jozsa (1994), The stabilisation of quantum computations, in
    Proceedings of the Workshop on Physics of Computation: PhysComp ’94, IEEE Computer Society
    Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 60–62.

M. Biafore (1994), Can quantum computers have simple Hamiltonians, in Proceedings of the Workshop
    on Physics of Computation: PhysComp ’94, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA,
    pp. 63–68.

D. Boneh and R. J. Lipton (1995), Quantum cryptanalysis of hidden linear functions, Advances in
    Cryptology—CRYPTO ’95, Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Cryptology Conference,
    Santa Barbara, CA, Aug. 27–31, D. Coppersmith, ed. Springer, pp. 424–437.

J. F. Canny and J. Reif (1987), New lower bound techniques for robot motion planning problems, in
    Proceedings of the 28th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer
    Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 49–60.

J. Choi, J. Sellen, and C.-K. Yap (1995), Precision-sensitive Euclidean shortest path in 3-space,
    in Proceedings of the 11th Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, ACM, New York,
    pp. 350–359.

I. L. Chuang, R. Laflamme, P. W. Shor, and W. H. Zurek (1995), Quantum computers, factoring
     and decoherence, Science, 270, pp. 1635–1637.

I. L. Chuang and Y. Yamamoto (1995), A simple quantum computer, Phys. Rev. A, 52, pp. 3489–3496.

A. Church (1936), An unsolvable problem of elementary number theory, Amer. J. Math., 58, pp. 345–
    363.

J. I. Cirac and P. Zoller (1995), Quantum computations with cold trapped ions, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
     74, pp. 4091–4094.

R. Cleve (1994), A note on computing Fourier transforms by quantum programs, preprint.

D. Coppersmith (1994), An approximate Fourier transform useful in quantum factoring, IBM Research
    Report RC 19642.

D. Deutsch (1985), Quantum theory, the Church–Turing principle and the universal quantum com-
   puter, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, 400, pp. 96–117.

       (1989), Quantum computational networks, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, 425, pp. 73–90.

D. Deutsch, A. Barenco, and A. Ekert (1995), Universality of quantum computation, Proc. Roy.
    Soc. London Ser. A, 449, pp. 669-677.

D. Deutsch and R. Jozsa (1992), Rapid solution of problems by quantum computation, Proc. Roy.
   Soc. London Ser. A, 439, pp. 553–558.

D. P. DiVincenzo (1995), Two-bit gates are universal for quantum computation, Phys. Rev. A, 51,
    pp. 1015–1022.

A. Ekert and R. Jozsa (1995), Shor’s quantum algorithm for factorising numbers, Rev. Mod. Phys.,
    to appear.

R. Feynman (1982), Simulating physics with computers, Internat. J. Theoret. Phys., 21, pp. 467–488.
FACTORING WITH A QUANTUM COMPUTER                                                                   27


      (1986), Quantum mechanical computers, Found. Phys., 16, pp. 507–531. Originally appeared in
    Optics News (February 1985), pp. 11–20.

E. Fredkin and T. Toffoli (1982), Conservative logic, Internat. J. Theoret. Phys., 21, pp. 219–253.

D. M. Gordon (1993), Discrete logarithms in GF(p) using the number field sieve, SIAM J. Discrete
   Math., 6, pp. 124–139.

G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright (1979), An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers, Fifth ed., Oxford
    University Press, New York.

J. Hartmanis and J. Simon (1974), On the power of multiplication in random access machines, in
    Proceedings of the 15th Annual Symposium on Switching and Automata Theory, IEEE Computer
    Society, Long Beach, CA, pp. 13–23.

A. Karatsuba and Yu. Ofman (1962), Multiplication of multidigit numbers on automata, Dokl. Akad.
    Nauk SSSR, 145, pp. 293–294 (in Russian). English translation in Sov. Phys. Dokl., 7 (1963),
    pp. 595–596.

D. E. Knuth (1981), The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2: Seminumerical Algorithms, Second
    ed., Addison-Wesley.

E. Knill (1995), personal communication.

R. Landauer (1995a), Is quantum mechanics useful? Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, to
    appear.

      (1995b), Is quantum mechanically coherent computation useful? in Proceedings of the Drexel-4
    Symposium on Quantum Nonintegrability—Quantum Classical Correspondence, D. H. Feng and
    B-L. Hu, eds., International Press, to appear.

Y. Lecerf (1963), Machines de Turing réversibles. Récursive insolubilité en n ∈ N de l’équation
    u = θ n u, où θ est un isomorphisme de codes, C. R. Acad. Française Sci., 257, pp. 2597–2600.

A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., eds. (1993), The Development of the Number Field Sieve,
    Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 1554, Springer.

A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., M. S. Manasse, and J. M. Pollard (1990), The number field
    sieve, in Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, ACM, New
    York, pp. 564–572. An expanded version appeared in Lenstra and Lenstra [1993], pp. 11–42.

R. Y. Levine and A. T. Sherman (1990), A note on Bennett’s time-space tradeoff for reversible
   computation, SIAM J. Comput., 19, pp. 673–677.

S. Lloyd (1993), A potentially realizable quantum computer, Science, 261, pp. 1569–1571.

       (1994), Envisioning a quantum supercomputer, Science, 263, p. 695.

       (1995), Almost any quantum logic gate is universal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 75, pp. 346–349.

N. Margolus (1986), Quantum computation, Ann. New York Acad. Sci., 480, pp. 487–497.

      (1990), Parallel quantum computation, in Complexity, Entropy and the Physics of Information,
    Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Vol. VIII, W. H. Zurek, ed., Addison-
    Wesley, pp. 273–287.

G. L. Miller (1976), Riemann’s hypothesis and tests for primality, J. Comput. System Sci., 13, pp. 300–
    317.

A. M. Odlyzko (1995), personal communication.

G. M. Palma, K.-A. Suominen, and A. K. Ekert (1995), Quantum computers and dissipation, Proc.
   Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, submitted.
28                                                                                    P. W. SHOR


A. Peres (1993), Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
C. Pomerance (1987), Fast, rigorous factorization and discrete logarithm algorithms, in Discrete Algo-
    rithms and Complexity, Proceedings of the Japan–US Joint Seminar, June 4–6, 1986, Kyoto, D. S.
    Johnson, T. Nishizeki, A. Nozaki, and H. S. Wilf, eds., Academic Press, pp. 119–143.
E. Post (1936), Finite combinatory processes. Formulation I., J. Symbolic Logic, 1, pp. 103–105.
R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman (1978), A method of obtaining digital signatures and
    public-key cryptosystems, Comm. Assoc. Comput. Mach., 21, pp. 120–126.
L. A. Rubel (1989), Digital simulation of analog computation and Church’s thesis, J. Symbolic Logic,
    54, pp. 1011–1017.
A. Schönhage (1982), Asymptotically fast algorithms for the numerical multiplication and division
    of polynomials with complex coefficients, in Computer Algebra EUROCAM ’82, Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, Vol. 144, J. Calmet, ed., Springer, pp. 3–15.
A. Schönhage, A. F. W. Grotefeld, and E. Vetter (1994), Fast Algorithms: A Multitape Turing
    Machine Implementation, B. I. Wissenschaftsverlag, Mannheim, Germany.
A. Schönhage and V. Strassen (1971), Schnelle Multiplikation grosser Zahlen, Computing, 7,
   pp. 281–292.
P. W. Shor (1994), Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring, in Pro-
   ceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer
   Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 124–134.
      (1995), Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum memory, Phys. Rev. A, 52, pp. 2493–2496.
D. Simon (1994), On the power of quantum computation, in Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium
    on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 116–
    123.
T. Sleator and H. Weinfurter (1995), Realizable universal quantum logic gates, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
    74, pp. 4087–4090.
R. Solovay (1995), personal communication.
K. Steiglitz (1988), Two non-standard paradigms for computation: Analog machines and cellular
    automata, in Performance Limits in Communication Theory and Practice, Proceedings of the NATO
    Advanced Study Institute, Il Ciocco, Castelvecchio Pascoli, Tuscany, Italy, July 7–19, 1986, J. K.
    Skwirzynski, ed., Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 173–192.
W. G. Teich, K. Obermayer, and G. Mahler (1988), Structural basis of multistationary quantum
   systems II: Effective few-particle dynamics, Phys. Rev. B, 37, pp. 8111–8121.
T. Toffoli (1980), Reversible computing, in Automata, Languages and Programming, Seventh Collo-
    quium, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 84, J. W. de Bakker and J. van Leeuwen, eds.,
    Springer, pp. 632–644.
A. M. Turing (1936), On computable numbers, with an application to the Entscheidungsproblem, Proc.
    London Math. Soc. (2), 42, pp. 230–265. Corrections in Proc. London Math. Soc. (2), 43 (1937),
    pp. 544–546.
W. G. Unruh (1995), Maintaining coherence in quantum computers, Phys. Rev. A, 51, pp. 992–997.
P. van Emde Boas (1990), Machine models and simulations, in Handbook of Theoretical Computer
    Science, Vol. A, J. van Leeuwen, ed., Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 1–66.
A. Vergis, K. Steiglitz, and B. Dickinson (1986), The complexity of analog computation, Math.
    Comput. Simulation, 28, pp. 91–113.
A. Yao (1993), Quantum circuit complexity, in Proceedings of the 34th Annual Symposium on Foun-
    dations of Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 352–361.
