                                                     On the importance of the Bohmian approach for

                                                             interpreting CP-violation experiments


                                                                                 Dipankar Home1

                                                                      Bose Institute, Calcutta 700009, India
arXiv:quant-ph/9901065v1 25 Jan 1999




                                                                                  A.S.Majumdar2

                                                                   S.N.Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences
                                                            Block-JD, Sector III, Salt Lake, Calcutta 700091, India.




                                                                                     Abstract
                                                 We argue that the inference of CP violation in experiments involving the K 0 − K̄ 0
                                             system in weak interactions of particle physics is facilitated by the assumption of particle
                                             trajectories for the decaying particles and the decay products. A consistent explanation
                                             in terms of such trajectories is naturally incorporated within the Bohmian interpretation
                                             of quantum mechanics.

                                       1
                                           e-mail:dhom@boseinst.ernet.in
                                       2
                                           e-mail:archan@boson.bose.res.in




                                                                                          1
I. Introduction
    The Bohm model is able to provide a causal interpretation of quantum mechanics in a
consistent manner [1]. At the same time, the predictions of Bohmian mechanics are in exact
agreement with the standard quantum mechanical predictions for observable probabilities in all
usual experimental situations. In this paper we shall be concerned with examining the possible
importance of the Bohmian approach in interpreting certain experiments whose understanding
in terms of the standard interpretation is rather ambiguous.
    For the purpose of reinterpreting the standard quantum formalism using the Bohmian
scheme, a wave function ψ is not taken to provide a complete specification of the state of
an individual system; an additional ontological “position” coordinate (an objectively real “po-
sition” existing irrespective of any external observation) is ascribed to an individual particle.
The “position” coordinate of the particle evolves with time obeying an equation which can be
derived from the Schrodinger equation (considering the one dimensional case)

                                   ∂ψ          h̄2 ∂ 2 ψ
                             ih̄      = Hψ ≡ −           + V (x)ψ                            (1)
                                   ∂t          2m ∂x2
by writing

                                           ψ = ReiS/h̄                                       (2)

and using the continuity equation
                                         ∂         ∂ρ
                                            (ρv) +    =0                                     (3)
                                         ∂x        ∂t
for the probability distribution ρ(x, t) given by

                                              ρ = |ψ|2 .                                     (4)

It is important to note that ρ is ascribed an ontological significance by regarding it as repre-
senting the probability density of “particles” occupying actual positions. In contrast, in the
standard formulation ρ is interpreted as the probability density of finding a particle around a
certain position. Setting (ρv) equal to the quantum probability current leads naturally to the
Bohmian interpretation whrere the particle velocity v(x, t) is given by

                                              dx   1 ∂S
                                         v≡      =                                           (5)
                                              dt   m ∂x
The particle “trajectory” is completely deterministic and is obtained by integrating (5) with
the appropriate initial conditions. The essential significance of Bohm’s model lies in providing
an elegant solution to the measurement problem (which has been described by Weinberg [2] as

                                                    2
“the most important puzzle in the interpretation of quantum mechanics”) without requiring
wave function collapse, since according to the Bohmian interpretation, in any measurement a
definite outcome is singled out by the relevant ontological position coordinate.
     In view of the importance of the Bohm model in providing not only an internally consistent
alternative interpretation of the standard quantum formalism, but also perhaps the neatest
solution to the measurement problem [1], it should be worthwhile to look for specific situations
where the conceptual superiority of Bohm’s model over the standard interpretation may become
easily transparent. To this end, we now proceed to examine the analysis of a fundamentally
important experiment of particle physics, namely, the discovery of CP-violation [3].
II. The CP-violation experiment
     C(charge conjugation) and P(parity) are two of the fundamental discrete symmetries of
nature, the violations of which have not been empirically detected in phenomena other than
weak interactions. If a third discrete symmetry T(time reversal) is taken into account, there
exists a fundamental theorem of quantum field theory, viz., the CPT theorem which states that
all physical processes are invariant under the combined operation of CPT. Nevertheless, there
is no theorem forbidding the violation of CP symmetry, and indeed, there have been several
experiments to date [4], starting from the pioneering observation of Christenson, Cronin, Fitch
and Turlay [3], that have revealed the occurrence of CP violation through weak interactions of
particle physics involving the particles K 0 and K̄ 0 . The eigenstates of strangeness K 0 (s = +1)
and its CP conjugate K̄ 0 (s = −1) are produced in strong interactions, for example, the decay
of Φ particles. Weak interactions do not conserve strangeness, whereby K 0 and K̄ 0 can mix
through intermediate states like 2π, 3π, πµν, πeν, etc. The observable particles, which are the
long lived K-meson KL , and the short lived one KS , are linear superpositions of K 0 and K̄ 0 ,
i.e.,
                                                           q
                            |KL i = (p|K 0 i − q|K̄ 0 i)/ |p|2 + |q|2                          (6)
                                                           q
                            |KS i = (p|K 0 i + q|K̄ 0 i)/ |p|2 + |q|2                          (7)

which obey the exponential decay law |KL i → |KL iexp(−ΓL t/2)exp(−imL t) and analogously
for |KS i, where ΓL and mL are the decay width and mass respectively of the KL particle. It
follows from (6) and (7) that
                                                 |p|2 − |q|2
                                   hKL |KS i =                                                 (8)
                                                 |p|2 + |q|2
     CP violation takes place if the states |KL i and |KS i are not orthogonal. Through weak
interactions the KS particle decays rapidly into channels such as KS → π + π − and KS → 2π 0
with a mean lifetime of 10−10 s, whereas, the predominant decay modes of KL are KL →
π ± e± ν (with branching ratio ∼ 39%), KL → π ± µ± ν(∼ 27%), and KL → 3π(∼ 33%) [4].
The CP violating decay mode KL → 2π is extremely rare (with branching ratio ∼ 10−3 ) in

                                                 3
the background of the other large decay modes. Considering the Schrodinger evolution, if
the analysis of the term corresponding to Ks in the relevant initial wave function shows that
it cannot contribute significantly to the emission of two pions with suitable momenta and
locations, then one can infer the occurrence of CP violation in this particular situation. In
other words such 2π can only arise through the KL decay mode. The momenta and locations
of the emitted pions are important since the key experimental issue is to detect the 2π particles
coming from the decay of KL and identify them as coming from KL and not KS .
    In a typical experiment to detect CP violation, an initial state of the type

                                  |ψi i = (a|KL i + b|KS i)                                  (9)

is used which is a coherent superposition of the KL and KS states. Such a state has been
produced by the technique of ‘regeneration’ [5] which has been used in a large number of
experiments [6]. The common feature of all these experiments is the measurement of the vector
            →
momenta pi of the charged decay products π + π − or 2π 0 from the decaying pions. It is only
the type of instrument used for actually measuring the momenta that varies from experiment
to experiment.
III. Bohmian trajectories
    To see how the Bohmian interpretation helps in drawing the relevant inference from this
experiment, we concentrate on the analysis of a single event in which the two emitted pions
from a decaying kaon are detected by two detectors respectively along two different directions.
                                 →       →
From the measured momenta p1 and p2 , the “trajectories” followed by the individual pions
are retrodictively inferred assuming that they have followed linear “trajectories”. The point of
intersection of these retrodicted “trajectories” is inferred to be the point from which the decay
products have emanated from the decaying system; in other words, what is technically known
as the “decay vertex” is determined in this way. The value of the momentum of the decaying
                      → →      →
kaon is obtained by pk =p1 + p2 . Once the decay vertex and the kaon momentum is known, one
estimates the time taken by the kaon to reach the decay vertex from the source, again using at
this stage the idea of a linear “trajectory”. If this time turns out to be much larger than the
KS mean lifetime (∼ 10−10 s), one infers that the detected 2π pair must have come from KL ,
which, as already mentioned, is the signature of CP violation.
    It is thus evident from the above discussion that the assumption of a linear “trajectory”
of a freely evolving particle (kaon or pion) provides a consistent explanation in support of CP
violation in such an experiment. Within the standard interpretationm of quantum mechanics,
there is no way one can justify assigning a “trajectory” to a freely evolving particle. Moreover,
assuming such a “trajectory” to be linear is an additional ad hoc input. One possible argument
could be to assign localized wave packets to emitted pions and kaons, and to use the fact
that their peaks follow classical trajectories in the case of a free evolution. However, in the
standard quantum mechanical description of decay processes, the decay products are regarded
as asymptotically free, and hence should be represented by plane wave states. Moreover, even

                                               4
if they are approximated in some sense by localized wave packets, there would be inevitable
spreading of the wave packets. Even if this spreading is regarded as negligible within the time
interval concerned, a ‘literal identification’ of the wave packet with the particle is conceptually
impermissible without an additional input at the fundamental level in the form of the notion
of a “particle” with a definite position even when unobserved (“particle” ontology).
    On the other hand, the assumption of linear “trajectories” followed by the decaying particles
and the decay products is amenable to a natural explanation within the Bohmian framework.
The decaying kaons as well as the asymptotically free decay products are represented by plane
waves

                                          ψ ∼ eikx .                                          (10)

Hence it follows that in the Bohmian scheme the velocity equation (5) is in this case given by
                                          dx   h̄k
                                             =                                                (11)
                                          dt   m
which when integrated provides the linear “trajectories” of the particles. These trajectories are
ontological and deterministic. Therefore, in this interpretation, the exact position coordinates
of the “decay vertex” can be assigned in a natural way by retrodicting the pion “trajectories”
without any inconsistencies of the type inherent in the standard interpretation. Hence, it seems
necessary that the standard formalism of quantum mechanics needs to be supplemented with
the Bohmian interpretation of ontological particle “trajectory” (in the sense that the particle
has traversed a well defined path even when unobserved) to enable for the consistent inference
of the observation of CP violation in the actual experiments involving kaon decays.
IV. Concluding remarks
    The main reasons for choosing, in particular, the CP violation experiment for this purpose
are the following. First, unlike other common high energy experiments this particular experi-
ment involves not merely the measurement of some physical quantities but inferring from the
measured quantities the violation of a fundamental symmetry property of the pertinent physi-
cal interactions. Secondly, again unlike other common high energy experiments, the effects of
particle creation and annihilation are not relevant for the important part of the experiment
involved with the prediction of CP violation, and no second quantized treatment is required
for the theoretical framework. The crucial phenomena of particle decays which this experiment
is concerned with, is appropriately described in terms of the Schrodinger equation (see [4] and
references therein) for which there exists a consistent Bohmian interpretation. Note that ignor-
ing interpretational nuances, if one tries to follow a very pragmatic approach and approximates
the plane wave states of the decay products by wave packets whose peaks follow classical tra-
jectories with finite speeds, careful estimates need to be done to quantify the resulting errors
or fluctuations due to spreading of wave packets by taking into account the actual distances
involved in the performed experiments. (Of course, the estimates of these distances related to

                                                5
the particle trajectories are fundamental from the Bohmian perspective.) This is important
because the CP violation effect is exceedingly small; the branching ratio of the CP violating
decay mode KL → 2π is 10−3. In none of the CP violation experiments performed to date has
this point been considered in the relevant analysis.
    We conclude by noting that this analysis suggests that it should be worthwhile to look for
more such appropriate examples where the inadequacy or ambiguity of the standard formalism
in comprehending the results of the concerned experiments can be avoided by using the Bohmian
interpretation. It should be appreciated that since there is no measurement problem in the
Bohmian interpretation, a Bohmian analysis is useful for all experiments in quantum mechanics,
and in particular scattering experiments where it is required to know why particles are detected
where they are at the end of the experiment. The answer to this is clear from the Bohmian
perspective—the particles are detected where they actually are. However, from the viewpoint of
the standard interpretation the explanation is rather obscure, as long as the Schrodinger wave
function is regarded as the complete description of the physical system. In this context it has
been recently argued [7] that the concept of quantum probability current, a full understanding
of which is provided by Bohmian mechanics, is fundamental for a genuine understanding of
scattering phenomena. Apart from this, it has been claimed [8] that a special significance of
Bohmian mechanics lies in experiments related to the measurement of time of flight of particles,
and tunelling time in particular for which it is difficult to find a consistent or unambiguous
definition within the standard framework of quantum mechanics. All this is of course different
from empirically verifying a new consequence, if any exists, of the Bohmian interpretation which
is not obtainable from the standard interpretation. Nevertheless, such investigations like the
one reported in this paper could be helpful in understanding more clearly the relative merits
of the standard and Bohmian interpretations.



   This work was supported by the Department of Science and Technology, India.




                                               6
   REFERENCES



[1 ] P.R.Holland, “The Quantum Theory of Motion”, (Cambridge University Press, London,
      1993); D.Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85 (1952) 166; D.Bohm and B.J.Hiley, “The Undivided
      Universe”, (Routledge, London, 1993); J.T.Cushing, “Quantum Mechanics - Historical
      Contingency and the Copenhagen Hegemony”, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
      1994).

[2 ] S.Weinberg, “Dreams of a final theory”, (Vintage, London, 1993) p. 64.

[3 ] J.H.Christenson, J.W.Cronin, V.L.Fitch and R.Turlay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 138.

[4 ] For a review, see for instance, K.Kleinknecht, in “CP violation”, edited by C.Jarlskog,
      (World Scientific, Singapore, 1989) pp. 41 -104.

[5 ] A.Pais and O.Piccioni, Phys. Rev. 100 (1955) 1487.

[6 ] For eample, see, C.Geweniger et al., Phys. Lett. B 48 (1974) 487; V.Chaloupka et al.,
      Phys. Lett. B 50 (1974) 1; W.C.Carithers et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 34 (1975) 1244;
      N.Grossmann, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 59 (1987) 18.

[7 ] M.Daumer, D.Duerr, S.Goldstein and N.Zanghi, J. Stat. Phys. 88 (1997) 967.

[8 ] C.R.Leavens, Phys Lett. A197 (1995) 88; in “Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum Theory:
      An Appraisal”, eds. J.T.Cushing, A.Fine and S.Goldstein (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1996).




                                             7
