                                                    Space-Time Structure as Hidden Variable
                                                                                    Bart Jongejan
                                                                         Cæciliavej 31, 2500 Valby, Denmark
                                                                          Electronic address: bart@cst.ku.dk


                                                    EPR correlations exist and can be observed independently of any a priori given frame of
                                                  reference. We can even construct a frame of reference that is based on these correlations.
                                                  This observation-based frame of reference is equivalent to the customary a priori given
                                                  frame of reference of the laboratory when describing real EPR experiments.
arXiv:quant-ph/0007010v1 5 Jul 2000




                                                    J.S. Bell has argued that local hidden parameter theories that reproduce the predic-
                                                  tions of Quantum Mechanics cannot exist, but the counterfactual reasoning leading to
                                                  Bell's conclusion is physically meaningless if the frame of reference that is based on EPR-
                                                  correlations is accepted as the backdrop for EPR-type experiments.
                                                    The refutal of Bell's proof opens up for the construction of a viable hidden parameter
                                                  theory. A model of a spin h̄/2 particle in terms of a non-flat metric of space-time is shown
                                                  to be able to reproduce the predictions of quantum mechanics in the Bohm-Aharonov
                                                  version of the EPR experiment, without introducing non-locality.

                                                  PACS numbers: 03.65.Bz, 02.40.Ky, 04.20.Gz




                                                                                I.   HIDDEN VARIABLES

                                                              A. The Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen Gedanken experiment
                                         Albert Einstein was convinced that quantum mechanics is an incomplete theory, which was a position opposite
                                      to that of Niels Bohr. Their discussion culminated in a paper by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (EPR) [1], in which
                                      they showed how one can measure two non-commuting physical quantities to any degree of accuracy. Bohr's reply
                                      [2] was soon to follow. The issue is still debated.
                                         The set-up of the EPR experiment consists of two observation posts doing measurements of momentum or position
                                      on the flown-apart members of particle pairs that have been carefully prepared to have no net momentum relative
                                      to the laboratory frame.
                                         The particles in a pair can be regarded as exact copies of each other, apart from being mirrored: if the same
                                      measurement is performed at both observation posts, then the outcomes are each other’s exact opposites. Given a
                                      quantity to be determined for both particles, we can suffice with doing only one of the measurements.
                                         EPR’s idea was that two non-commuting quantities, such as momentum and position, can be determined by
                                      measuring one of the quantities directly and by deriving the value of the other quantity from the outcome of the
                                      measurement of that quantity on the other particle in the pair.
                                         Bohm and Aharonov [3] devised a version of the EPR Gedanken experiment that has been the focus of much
                                      theoretical and experimental work. In their experiment, the measurements are done on pairs of spin h̄/2 particles
                                      that are prepared in the singlet state, which is a quantum state that does not hold any information about the
                                      directions of the spins of the individual particles.
                                         In the Bohm-Aharonov experiment the particles fly apart toward two widely separated observation posts, where
                                      they traverse the gaps of Stern-Gerlach magnets. During such a traversal, due to a coupling between the particle’s
                                      intrinsic spin and the longitudinal gradient of the magnetic field, the particle’s path is bent either away from or
                                      toward the pole where the magnetic field is strongest. The particle finally hits one of two detectors, depending on
                                      which route it took. One of the detectors only records particles that had spin up (↑), while the other only records
                                      those with spin down (↓), “up” and “down” being defined relative to the Stern-Gerlach magnet. The detectors are
                                      fixed to their respective Stern-Gerlach magnets, so that the directions that are “up” and “down” rotate together
                                      with the freely orientable Stern-Gerlach magnets.
             B. Can counterfactual considerations complete the description of physical reality?
   Employing propositions of the type that EPR used to show that quantum mechanics can not be complete, J.S.
Bell [4] showed that any theory that reproduces the predictions made by quantum mechanics and yet is more
complete than quantum mechanics necessarily postulates instantaneous action at a distance. In other words, the
kind of theories that Einstein envisaged as successors to quantum mechanics would be difficult to reconcile with
relativity theory, which champions locality and does not allow any signal to travel faster than light.
   Bell’s proof is dependent on counterfactual propositions. A counterfactual proposition assigns a determinate value
to a quantity that could have been directly observable, but is not, typically because another, incommensurable
quantity is measured. The experimental basis - if you can call it that - for this assignment is the measurement of
the same quantity on the far away twin particle. The reasoning is that the measurement on the twin is as good as
the measurement on the particle itself, because the inner states of the particles must be fully correlated in order
to preserve the isotropy of the quantum state of the pair.
   To give teeth to such a counterfactual proposition, not only do we have to ascribe reality to the result of the
measurement, but also to the angle between the counterfactual orientation of the instrument and the (factual or
counterfactual) orientation of the other instrument.
   Let us hold EPR’s and Bell’s counterfactual reasoning against the background of Riemannian geometry, or,
more specifically, general relativity. Only geometric relations, such as angles and distances, between things that
are local to each other in space and in time bear physical meaning according to the general relativity theory.
Geometric relations over long spatio-temporal distances, such as the angle between the directions of observation in
the Bohm-Aharonov experiment, are a different matter.
   If it is not assumed that space-time is flat, then only an operational definition can lend physical meaning to these
relations. In general, different operational definitions can give physical meaning to the same relation, but in theory
the methods need not agree on the outcomes of the measurements. This is clearly exemplified by the multitude of
theory laden operational definitions for distances on cosmological scales.
   What then is the angel between a factual set-up of a Stern-Gerlach magnet at one of the two observation posts
and a counterfactual set-up of the Stern-Gerlach magnet at the other observation post? Of course, because one of
the two set-ups is not effectuated, there is no direct means of measuring this angle. We can only base our answer
on interpolation, together with a smoothness assumption that coordinates the interpolated but counterfactual
observation with real ones. Normally, interpolation depends on a smoothness assumption that is innocuous, because
the missing, interpolated values may some day be replaced by outcomes of real experiments. In such cases,
interpolation is a falsifiable theory and therefore acceptable. In Bell’s proof, the interpolation is not falsifiable,
because the measuring apparatus is sitting itself in the way. That weakens Bell’s conclusion. We can only accept
Bell’s proof if we assume that the space time backdrop is smooth and constant enough to allow us to interpolate
between measurements, but this assumption excludes from consideration any theory that denies that space-time is
like that.

                  C. The Bohm-Aharonov experiment without flat-space preconception.
   Bell's proof hinges on the postulate that space time is flat, but this postulate may be false. This is the main
theme of this paper and we will dwell on it a little more, because understanding the epistemological restrictions
that relativity imposes is essential for appreciating the approach towards hidden variables that is presented later.
   First think of the Bohm-Aharonov experiment as a set-up consisting of two observation posts connected by the
floor of a laboratory or something else that we may regard as rigid. Each observation post consists of a Stern-Gerlach
magnet that is freely orientable in its mounting into any of a large number of directions, or lines of observation.
Each such orientation is identifiable, for example by reading off the color of a mark on the mounting that a pointer
aligned with the axis of the magnet is pointing at. There may be many differently colored marks, each identifying
a unique orientation of the magnet. If one wishes so one can define the mountings of the instrument to include far
away stars, which then can be used as the marks for that post. We also have calibrated scales on the mounting so
that we have the option to read off the angular coordinates of the direction vector of the Stern-Gerlach magnet. A
post's electron detectors are fixed to the Stern-Gerlach magnet inside that post. The rigid connection between the
two posts (or rather: between the mountings), together with conventional means of doing geodesy (measuring rods,
light beams, gyroscopes) provides us with a reference frame in which both measuring instruments have definite
positions and orientations. Even counterfactual orientations can be tracked, because the rigid frame "fixes" all
thinkable orientations. This is the normal, "robust" experimental context of Bell's proof.
   Now remove all unnecessary equipment: the measuring rods, light beams, gyroscopes, scales and even the lab-
oratory floor. Would that make any difference? We did not do away the mountings of the instruments and are
therefore still able to identify each orientation by reading off the color of the mark that a Stern-Gerlach magnet is
pointing at. Can we reconstruct the experiment with this basic equipment?
  From each pair of measurements we obtain a data-triplet: the color of the mark that the left magnet was pointing
at, idem for the right magnet and finally the outcome of the detectors, which arbitrarily may be defined to be "S"
(for "same") if both "up" or both "down" detectors were hit and "N" (for "not same") if one "up" and one
"down" detector was triggered. Our logbook will have just three columns, the experiment has only three degrees
of freedom.
  After doing a long series of such experiments, with the magnets having been oriented in all possible combinations
of directions many times, the log of outcomes will enable us to assign statistical probabilities for measuring the
same spin component to each pair of orientations of the Stern-Gerlach magnets. We might for example observe that
"yellow" left and "blue" right have a 73% chance of resulting in the value "S". There is a conceptual difference
with the full blown experimental set-up, though: we have no prior knowledge of the geometric relations between
the Stern-Gerlach magnets; we can only pairwise statistically relate marks on the mountings with each other. We
do not even know the angles between two different orientations of the same magnet!
  Now we will try to organize the three columns of obtained data by mapping the colored marks that identify
directions of observations onto points on a sphere in such a way that exactly one point is assigned to each mark.
This mapping must map the marks on both surroundings, however far separated from each other, onto a single
sphere that does not exist physically, but only as a mathematical tool. Underlying the mapping is the working
hypothesis that there is a functional relation between the statistical probability to measure the same component
and the angle, as measured on this sphere, between the orientations of the Stern-Gerlach magnets. We can start
to assume a linear dependency: a 100% probability and a 0 % probability correspond to angles of 180◦ and of 0◦
between the magnets, a 10% probability would correspond to 18◦ , and so on. Such a relation would be appropriate if
the spinning particles were macroscopic objects with observationally well defined "north" and "south" hemispheres.
However, if we apply this relation to our data then the obtained angles force us to map the same mark onto several
points, which is not what we wanted.
  Eventually, we would find that

     P (S) = probability to measure same value =
                                           
                 angle between orientations
        = sin2                                   (1a)
                              2
  establishes a 1-1 mapping, as does its mirroring twin

     P (S) = probability to measure same value =
                                           
             2   angle between orientations
        = cos                                 .  (1b)
                              2
  Now, not only would we have learned how to define angles between the two measuring instruments when directed
towards two given colored marks, we would also have a consistent way to figure out the angles between the colored
marks at one and the same post. That means that we would have regained the spherical geometry relations that we
did not assume as given a priori. That, in turn, would enable us to deliver exactly the same kind of experimental
report as someone who had a rigid frame to connect the measuring posts and rods, light beams, gyroscopes and
scales to measure the geometry. We could also verify the contingent fact that this statistical way of determining
geometric relations is perfectly consistent with other, more conventional means, such as with the help of rods, light
beams, gyroscopes and scales. But of course, as little physical sense it makes to ascribe temperature and pressure
(or the mean kinetic energy and momentum per particle) to a single particle in a gas, as little sense would it make
to ascribe the statistically defined angle to a pair of measurements that contributed to the very determination of
the angle. A fortiori, we can not draw firm conclusions from an argument that hinges on a counterfactual set-up
controlled by the statistically defined angle. There is no observational basis for assigning a value to such an angle,
because the value, as defined operationally in the above way, is of statistical character and therefore not applicable
to any pair of orientations in any specific pair of measurements, but only in the long run of many measurement event
pairs. In addition, the assignment of a value of the angle, operationally defined as above, to pairs of orientations
that are not both effectuated, can only be based on an arbitrary convention and therefore renders any argument
that is based on such angles unconvincing.
  If the presented way of constructing a frame of reference is so feeble that it does not allow us to assign values
to angles between counterfactual setups, why then should we not stick with the conventional means using rods,
gyroscopes and so on? The reason is that our method is not any more feeble than conventional means! Unless
conventional methods mysteriously gain strength somewhere in the transition from the quantum to the classical
regime, any angle that can be measured by conventional means can also be measured using a sufficiently large
ensemble of spin component observations on an equally large number of pairs of spin h̄/2 particles, to any desired
accuracy. However, the proposed method, which is obviously based on quantum phenomena, has the additional
advantage that it very clearly delineates the domain of applicability of the method; a domain of applicability that
can not be surpassed by conventional methods, unless the aforementioned mysterious powers opened a back door
for the conventional methods to do measurements of angles that are out of reach for the proposed method.
  Whereas proofs like Bell's are hard pressed because of the lack of an observational basis for the assumed frame
of reference, a realist point of view is not obstructed in the same way. It is sensible to imagine a counterfactual
set-up of a measuring apparatus that is oriented towards a particular colored mark and with a definite value of the
spin component in that direction, but we must keep in mind that the whereabouts of the instrument's orientation
relative to other (factual or counterfactual) orientations is unknown. Underlying Bell's and similar proofs is a
concept of realism that is far more encompassing than necessary. Things that derive the status of being part
of reality by force of real observations, such as the angle between directions of observation and even systems of
coordinates in general, can not be idealized to an existence detached from these observations without introducing
trouble in some corners of our theoretical picture of the world.

  II. MATHEMATICAL CONSTRAINTS ON HIDDEN VARIABLE THEORIES OF SPIN h̄/2
                                PARTICLE

                                     A. What makes an aspirant HV theory?
  We have seen that the Bohm-Aharonov experiment has just three relevant degrees of freedom: color of left mark,
color of right mark and the combination of the outcomes. We will now discuss hidden variable theories that also
exhibit three degrees of freedom and hope to find one that can be made to correspond to the Bohm-Aharonov
experiment and that explains the statistical correlations found in the Bohm-Aharonov experiment (which are
assumed to be accurately predicted by quantum mechanics).
  The contemplated hidden variable theories all have one aspect in common: not only the Stern-Gerlach magnets
have definite orientations, also the particle itself has one, which is the axis of rotational symmetry or "spin axis".
The three variables that specify any configuration of the three directions are (a) the angle between the left measuring
apparatus and the spin axis, (b) the angle between the right measuring apparatus and the spin axis and (c) the angle
between the left measuring apparatus and the right measuring apparatus. None of these variables are precisely
measurable, but each corresponds to observed data: if the left "up" detector is triggered, then the angle between
the left measuring apparatus and the spin axis is less than 90◦ . If the "down" detector is triggered, the angle is
somewhere between 90◦ and 180◦ . Likewise for the right detector. The angle between the measuring apparatuses
is taken to be the angle that was statistically derived from the outcomes of a long series of Bohm-Aharonov
measurements, using Eq. (1b).
  The main point made by Bell was that no local hidden variable theory is able to reproduce the predictions of
quantum mechanics. The requirement that our aspirant hidden variable theories are local puts three constraints on
the statistical distribution of the angles between the measuring apparatuses and between each measuring apparatus
and the particle's spin axis. These will be discussed now.

      Constraint 1. The orientations of the measuring instruments are unrelated.
  Each measuring apparatus is oriented in a way that does not depend on the orientation of the other instrument,
not even statistically. If the movements of the measuring apparatuses A and B were restricted to a plane, then this
constraint would translate to a uniform distribution of angles 6 AB in the range 0 ≤ 6 AB ≤ π. We do, however,
assume that the instruments are freely orientable in space. In that case, the probability that the angle between A
and B is 6 AB is proportional to sin 6 AB.
  Whereas the angle is non-uniformly distributed, its cosine is not. So we require a uniform distribution ρ (ZAB ) of
the inner product ZAB = −cos6 AB = −a.b in the range −1 ≤ ZAB ≤ 1. The minus sign is arbitrarily introduced
to compensate for the circumstance that the particles' spins are anti-parallel.
                            R1
  Normalization requires −1 ρ (ZAB ) dZAB = 1, so that
                     ρ (ZAB ) = 1/2                   (2)
  It is worthwhile to indicate which role the set-up plays. We ask that during each measurement the measuring
apparatus points at a randomly chosen point of its own surroundings. This does not automatically imply an
isotropic distribution of the orientations with respect to each other: one could imagine that each observation post's
orientations, taken separately, would survive a "randomness test", but that the orientations were not distributed
isotropically with respect to each other. That situation could arise if the observers used the same sequence of
random numbers to prepare the instruments for each pair of measurements. We assume that such correlation does
not occur, because that seems to be the only assumption that is compatible with the principles of locality, causality
and free will.
       Constraint 2. (Locality condition.) The orientation of one magnet does not influence the result obtained with
    the other.
  Suppose that someone came up with a HV theory of a spin h̄/2 particle. In order to test the claim that it
reproduces the predictions of QM in Bohm-Aharonov experiments, we had to subject the theory to a Gedanken
experiment in which a great number of spin-component measurements were randomly chosen. How would the
randomly chosen orientations of a measuring instrument be distributed with respect to the particle's axis of
rotational symmetry? As we have no means of observing this distribution, we postulate one. In the absence of any
reason to assume a non-isotropic distribution, we assume the isotropic distribution. Call the inner product of the
orientation of the instrument and the direction of the particle (denoted by unit vectors) ZA and ZB (for instrument
A and instrument B). Require that ρ (ZA ) = ρ (ZB ) = 1/2 .
  The sign of ZA determines the outcome of the measurement made with the magnet at observation post A. The
locality condition says that ZA is independent of the orientation of instrument B. The angle between the instruments
can be taken to represent this orientation, in which case we locality condition translates to

          ρ (ZA , ZAB ) = ρ (ZA ) ρ (ZAB ) = 1/4.             (3a)

  Alternatively, we can take the (hidden) angle between instrument B and the spin axis as representing the
orientation, so we also require that

           ρ (ZA , ZB ) = ρ (ZA ) ρ (ZB ) = 1/4.              (3b)

   As we are used to specify orientations with two mutually independent angles, it is tempting to require that ZA
is independent of both of ZAB and ZB :

   ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) = ρ (ZA ) ρ (ZB ) ρ (ZAB ) = 1/8.        (4)

  However, below we will see that this conflicts with the next constraint and even with the statistics of classical
spinning particles.

      Constraint 3. The theory reproduces the predictions of quantum mechanics
  The correlation between the outcomes of measurements on flown-apart particles with counter parallel spin axis
conforms exactly to the predictions of QM (see also Eq. (1b)):

                                                 6       AB
         P (S) ≡ P (↑↑) + P (↓↓) = sin2
                                                         2
                                 1 + ZAB
                             =                                (5a)
                                    2
                                                     6   AB
         P (N ) ≡ P (↑↓) + P (↓↑) = cos2
                                                         2
                                 1 − ZAB
                            =            .                    (5b)
                                    2


      B. The joint distribution ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) that explains the quantum mechanical predictions.
  We assume that in a HV theory, a full specification of a measurement of two spin components in the Bohm-
Aharonov experiment requires three angles, or there cosines. We must now investigate whether there are distri-
butions ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) of these three quantities that fulfill all three constraints. For example, the first constraint
requires that
              Z 1Z 1
 ρ (ZAB ) =                ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) dZA dZB = 1/2, (6)
               −1     −1


  and second constraint, the locality condition, requires that
                      Z 1
   ρ (ZA , Z AB ) =          ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) dZB = 1/4.     (7)
                       −1
  Finally, according to quantum mechanics we must find that
                      Z 1Z 1
                   −1
  P (↑↑) = ρ(ZAB )           ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) dZA dZB
                       0   0
                           1 + ZAB
                        =          .                     (8)
                              4
   As it did not seem a trivial task to solve the set of equations constituting the three constraints, a computer aided
approach was chosen. It was not difficult to find a distribution that fulfills constraints 1 an 2, Eq. (4) is such a
distribution. Then, repeatedly applying an algorithm that transforms the distribution to a new distribution that
also fulfills constraints 1 and 2, distributions were found that fulfill the third constraint as well. The algorithm
is as follows: Choose two values for each of ZA , ZB and ZAB . These values are the coordinates of eight cells, the
probability density of which we are going to redistribute. Choose an amount △ρ and add this amount to four cells
spanning a tetrahedron and subtract the same amount from the remaining cells. By the right choice of △ρ we can
empty at least one of the eight cells. See Fig. 1. Some of the results of this discrete approximation can be seen in
Figs. 2-4.
   The distribution in Eq. (4) fully acknowledges the freedom of the experimenters to vary the angle between the
instruments (ZAB ) and it guarantees the isotropic distribution of the axis of the model relative to the lines of
observation (ZA and ZB ). Yet this distribution is not realistic at all, because it does not restrict the angles between
the instruments (arccos −Z AB ) and the angles between the measurement instruments and the axis of the model
(arccos ZA and arccos ZB ). These three angles can not be completely independent: for example can the angle
between the measuring instruments not exceed the sum of the angles between the instruments and the axis of the
model.
   If two of the angles already are fixed to any values between 0 and π (any two of {arccos ZAB ,arccos ZA ,arccos ZB },
call them α1 and α2 ), then we have the following constraint on the third angle α3 :
              |α1 − α2 | ≤ α3 ≤ α1 + α2 .             (9)
  That means that whereas any two of the three angles are independent of each other, there exists a mutual
dependency between the three angles.
  The uniform distribution of three vectors a, b and c over all directions illustrates this dependency. In an Euclidean
frame of reference, the joint density of the three inner products s = ZA = a.c, t = ZB = b.c, u = ZAB = a.b is
                   √                            −1
     ρ (s, t, u) = 8π 1 + 2stu − s2 − t2 − u2
                    1 + 2stu − s2 − t2 − u2 > 0
                                                 

         =0       (1 + 2stu − s2 − t2 − u2 ≤ 0).     (10)
  Figure 3 illustrates the mutual dependency between the three directions and the remarkable discontinuity of the
density at the border between possible and impossible configurations,
  The next step is the fulfillment of constraint 3. Using the transformation algorithm again, we eventually approach
a distribution that reproduces the predictions of quantum mechanics (Eq. 5a/b). There are many distributions
that come very close, but they are all characterized by regions of almost emptiness and steep climbs to high values
of probability density. The following distribution, which is the limiting distribution as the number of subdivisions
in the discrete approximation goes to infinity, and which uses Dirac delta functions, fulfills all three constraints
(see Fig. 4 for a discrete approximation):
     ρ (ZA , ZB , ZAB ) = 1/8 [δ (ZA + ZB + ZAB + 1)
                  + δ (ZA − ZB − ZAB + 1)
                  + δ (ZA + ZB − ZAB − 1)
                  + δ (ZA − ZB + ZAB − 1)]           (11)
  This distribution indicates that one continuous degree of freedom is replaced by a discrete one: the density is
only non-zero on the surface of a tetrahedron spanned by four of the eight corners of the configuration cube.
  A classical configuration of three independent vectors is specified by three numbers, which are the lengths of the
sides of a triangle on the unit sphere. They can not live within less than the two dimensions of this sphere. On the
other hand, configurations that are compatible with QM require only two numbers and a sign, the third number
being a function of either the sum or the difference of the other two, depending on the sign.
  Perhaps somewhat unexpectedly, our search for a probability distribution for the angle between the instruments
and the angles between each instrument and the (hidden) spin axis did not merely result in a non-classical dis-
tribution, but also in a qualitative characterization of any hidden variable theory with hopes to fulfill all three
constraints: the theory must endow a model of a spin h̄/2 particle with a degeneracy that replaces one continuous
degree of freedom with a two-valued one. We will now look at a theory that accomplishes this feat.
     III. EXAMPLE: A HIDDEN VARIABLE MODEL BASED ON NON-FLAT SPACE-TIME
                                   STRUCTURE

                                                     A. Overview
   In the foregoing, a weakness in Bell's counterfactual reasoning was exposed by peeling away unwarranted and
mostly silent assumptions that are underlying his proof, until we were left with the nitty gritty observational
data. Then we postulated, in spite of Bell's conclusion, that the direction of a particle's spin is really existing,
although hidden from observation. We found that the QM-compatible configurations of three vectors, denoting
the orientations of the measuring instruments and a candidate model's hidden variable, seem to live within one
dimension less than classically expected.
   The next step is the construction of a model with a characteristic that we rightly can call the spin direction of
the model. We postulate that the stuff that the particle is made of is space time itself, or more specifically, the
structure of space time. We will check that the full specification of a geodetic path herein - tentatively representing
the world line of a measuring apparatus during a measurement - exhibits the same lack of one degree of freedom.
   Such a postulated space-time structure is in part based on guesswork, in part on esthetic rules, such as simplicity
and symmetry. The real structure of space time is perhaps unknowable, but we may hit upon a theory of the
structure of space time that survives the observations that we perform to test it.
   The presented model tries only to explain a very limited set of phenomena, namely the correlation between two
spin component measurements. We have not tried very hard to incorporate and explain other phenomena. Thus,
a simple thing like the spatial distance between the spinning particles is not expressed very well by the proposed
model, nor their relative movements. In fact, the model explains two widely different phenomena without making
a distinction, which shows that in any case the differences between these phenomena are not expressed in the
model. The first phenomenon is the correlation between the measurements of spin components on two different
particles that together form a system in the singlet state. The second phenomenon, that is explained equally well,
is the passage of a single spinning particle first through one, then through a second Stern-Gerlach magnet at some
distance from the first, that is inclined with respect to the first.

                                        B. Metric and geodesic equations
  Consider a metric gik

    ds2 = cos2 ϑ dt2 − dr2 − r2 dϑ2 − r2 sin2 ϑ dϕ2

                    + 2r sin2 ϑ dϕdt.                 (12)
   To get a feeling of how it would be like to be in a space time with this metric, imagine an infinite set of concentric
spheres. Suppose that you momentarily were attached to one of these spheres. You would have the feeling that this
sphere was rotating around the ϑ = 0 axis with angular velocity 1r = radius of 1
                                                                                 sphere
                                                                                        . In other words, you would feel
an acceleration away from the ϑ = 0 axis. If you were to move in the direction opposite to this intrinsic rotation
with angular velocity −1/r the acceleration would disappear. Although everywhere the experienced acceleration
could be explained as the effect of an angular velocity that gradually decreased as 1r , the spheres in this space time
are fixed to each other forever. It is the curvature of space-time that gives the experience of being accelerated, just
like the curvature of space-time caused by the Earth's mass lets us feel the force of gravitation: an acceleration
without movement, as opposed to the acceleration experienced in a rocket.
   The rotational effects in this space-time are due to the last term in the metric ground form, +2r sin2 ϑ dϕdϑ.
This term specifies the model's spin direction relative to the chosen frame of reference; by changing the sign of
this term or by rotating 180◦ along an axis perpendicular to the ϑ = 0 axis we obtain a model with opposite spin
direction.
   In order to investigate how free test-particles move in this space-time we have to solve the equations of motion

                  d2 xi         dxj dxk
                        = −Γijk         .             (13)
                  ds 2          ds ds

  The non-zero coefficients of the affine connection Γijk , which are symmetric in the lower indices, are:
                  2                                 2
    Γttr = sin2r ϑ                      Γtrϕ = − sin2 ϑ
                2
    Γrtϕ = sin2 ϑ                       Γrϑϑ = − r
    Γrϕϕ = − r sin2 ϑ                   Γϑtϕ = sin ϑrcos ϑ
    Γϑrϑ = 1r                           Γϑϕϕ = − sin ϑ cos ϑ
                                                      2ϑ
    Γϑtt = − sin ϑr2cos ϑ               Γϕtr = − cos
                                                   2r 2
                   2ϑ
    Γϕrϕ = 1+cos2r
                                        Γϕϑϕ = cos  ϑ
                                                sin ϑ
                                                      .

                                                               (14)

                                         dr                     ′      2
  With the shorthand notation U r = r′ = ds , U r = r′′ = dds2r etc. and the above connection Γijk the geodesic
equations become

              ′       − U r sin ϑ [sin ϑ(U t − rU ϕ )]
            Ut =                                           (15a)
                                      r
       (rU ϑ )2 − (rU ϕ sinϑ)[sin ϑ(U t − rU ϕ )]
   U r′ =                                                      (15b)
                            r
                        cos ϑ
    ′  − 2 U (rU ) + sin ϑ [sin ϑ(U t − rU ϕ )]2
              r    ϑ
  Uϑ =                                                         (15c)
                           r2
                     1
        U ϕ′ = 2          × −U r (rU ϕ sin ϑ)
                            
                 r sin ϑ
          + U cos2 ϑ sin ϑ(U t − rU ϕ )
                r
                                         

          cos ϑ
                (rU ϑ ) sin ϑ(U t − rU ϕ ) .
                                         
        +2                                       (15d)
          sin ϑ
  The geodesic equations have the following solutions:

                                        X
                             Ut = P +                      (16a)
                                        r
                                            2
                         ϕ P − Xcotg
                                  r
                                     ϑ
                       U =                                     (16b)
                               r
                                 X          2
                          A − sin
                             2    2
                        Uϑ        =  ϑ
                                               (16c)
                              r4
                 A − X2   2P X
     (U r )2 = −        +        + P 2 − W,    (16d)
                   r2       r
  where P, X, A and W are constants. We can also write

           P = cos2 ϑ U t + r sin2 ϑ U ϕ     (17a)

             X = r sin2 ϑ U t − rU ϕ
                                     
                                              (17b)
                 2                        2
     A = r2 U ϑ + r sin ϑ U t − rU ϕ
                                     
                                              (17c)
                2                  2
  W = cos ϑ U t − (U r ) − rU ϑ − (r sin ϑ U ϕ )2
                        2
                                

                        + 2r sin2 ϑ U t U ϕ                (17d)
  W is simply gij U i U j , the length of the vector U squared. Time-like geodesics have W > 0, space-like geodesics
have W < 0 and light-like geodesics have W = 0. We will restrict W to the values -1, 0 and 1. This restriction
removes an arbitrary scaling factor.
                               C. Comparison with paths in central force fields
  If we only look at time-like geodesics in the direction from past to future (the paths that test particles follow,
W = 1, U t > 0), then only three numbers P, X and A are needed to fully specify a geodesic. What are the
consequences of this paucity of orbit-fixing numbers? Let us compare a geodesic in a central gravitational field and
a geodesic in this model-space time. Four constants are needed to specify the orbit of a freely falling test particle A
with respect to a massive body, such as the orbit of a planet around a star. The shape of the orbit or eccentricity
- whether the orbit is a circle, an ellipse, a parabola or a hyperbola - provides one number. The size of the orbit
- e.g. the distance of closest approach to the central massive body - provides another number. The orientation of
the orbital plane, defined as the unit vector normal to the orbital plane, requires the specification of two angular
coordinates. That adds two more degrees of freedom and brings the total number of constants to four.
  For the time-like geodesics in our model-space-time the situation is different. If we assume that two numbers
are needed to specify "shape" and "size", then only one number is left to specify the "orbital plane". The quotes
indicate that we cannot be sure that it makes sense to talk about shape, size and orbital plane. We will later have
to look at that.
  If one number fixes an orbital plane then obviously the orbital orientation has only one degree of freedom. Given
one orbital plane, then another orbital plane can be specified with reference to the given orbital plane by providing
the difference of the "orbital plane numbers". In fact, there is an ambivalence in such a specification because of
the sign of the difference. This sign can not be specified without breaking the symmetry between the two planes:
we have to assume that either plane can play the role of reference plane and the expressions should not depend on
this choice in any arbitrary way.
  We have seen the same "directional degeneracy" before: the distribution of values ZA , ZB , ZAB that reproduces
quantum mechanics is such that given one Z-value, the other Z-values can be specified with reference to this single
Z-value. For example, if ZA is given then ZB is specified, up to a bivalent choice, by giving just one more number:
ZAB (see 7a-d).

                    D. How the constants define shape and orientation of the geodesic
  We will now look more closely at the constants of the motion and see whether it really is the case that there is
only one number to specify the orbital plane.
                                                                                                           2
  A, P, X and W are real numbers that only to some degree can be chosen freely. The expression for U ϑ indicates
                         √
that only values |X| ≤ A can lead to geodesics. √    It also shows that such geodesics are restricted to points where
         |X|                                                                                                        |X|
sin ϑ ≥ √  A
             . Geodesics with values of |X| close to  A are close to the equatorial plane ϑ = 2π , while a value of √ A
close to zero allows the geodesic to approach the poles very closely. Therefore we define

               X
            S= √                 (−1 ≤ S ≤ 1)
                A
                   ′′
                        tilt of orbital plane′′ .   (18)
   If S = −1 or S = 1 then sin ϑ = 1; such geodesics are equatorial. All other geodesics are wavering north and
south (and through) the equatorial plane and their orbital plane, if such a mathematical object can be defined, is
tilted with respect to the equatorial plane. The maximum angular distance from the equatorial plane is reached
when U ϑ = 0, which is when sin ϑ = |S|. We call S the "tilt of the orbital plane with respect to the equatorial
plane", in analogy to the tilt of a planetary orbit with respect to the Sun's equatorial plane, which also is equal to
the angle where the planet reaches its greatest angular distance from the equatorial plane. While we already have
seen that the tilt of a planetary orbit is only one of two constants that define the orientation of the orbital plane,
we still have to see whether there is such a second constant in the case of our model-space-time geodesics.
   We can learn much about the orbital shape and size from investigating the radial velocity. If A 6= X 2 then (U r )2
is a second order function of 1/r and otherwise it is a first order function of 1/r. The coefficient of the 1/r2 -term
is zero or negative, because A ≥ X 2 . From that follows that (U r )2 has a maximum if A 6= X 2 . If the equation
(U r )2 = 0has no solutions, then this maximum is negative, which is forbidden, (U r )2 being the square of a real
number and therefore necessarily non-negative. We can investigate the constraints on P, X, W and A that ensure
that

                  A − X2   2P X
    (U r )2 = −          +      + P2 − W = 0        (19)
                    r2       r
  has solutions.
  The solutions of 1/r are:
                            √
      1           PX ±       AP 2 − AW + X 2 W
        |U r =0 =                              .          (20)
      r                       A − X2
  The condition that there be solutions is that
                               X2
                                  
                  2
                P ≥W 1−              .                    (21)
                                A

   The factor in parentheses is non-negative, because A ≥ X 2 . If W ≤ 0, then the relation is fulfilled for all values
of P . For positive W the above relation puts a lower bound on the absolute value of P .
   Because the radial parameter r is non-negative, we are only interested in non-negative solutions of 1/r. If there
is one positive solution, then the trajectory is unbound: the positive solution is the point of closest approach, but
there is no point of greatest radial distance. If the other solution is zero, then the trajectory is just barely unbound
and has the status of a parabolic trajectory in a central force field. If the other solution is negative, the trajectory
is "hyperbolic". If there are two positive solutions, the trajectory is bound, like the elliptic trajectories in a central
field with a 1/r potential. If the two positive solutions are equal, the trajectory has constant radius, i.e. it is
comparable with circular orbits.
   The close analogy between classical orbits in central force fields and geodesics in our space-time model is concisely
expressed by
                                     2
    P2 − W   (U r )2 + U ⊥                    XP  X2
           =                              −      − 2,    (22a)
       2             2                         r  2r
  where
             2            2
        U⊥        = rU ϑ        + sin2 ϑ(U t − rU ϕ )2
             ′′
                  square of tangential velocity ′′ .     (22b)
  Eq. (22a) unmistakably has the signature of an energy, having a kinetic part depending on the squares of the
radial and tangential velocities and two potential parts, one of which is due to a long range 1/r potential that
can be attractive or repelling, like a Coulomb potential, while the other is due to a short range attractive 1/r2
potential. The 1/r potential gives rise to orbits having circular, elliptic, parabolic or hyperbolic shapes, while the
1/r2 potential adds a precession of pericentrum to the movement, like the shift of the perihelion of Mercury that
also is caused by a 1/r2 term.
  The energy expression [Eq. (22a)] contains two independent constants P and X that together define shape and
size of an orbit in the same way that shape and size of planetary orbits are defined by the mass of the sun and
the energy per kilogram of planetary mass, where X plays the role of the solar mass and (P 2 − W ) /2 the role of
energy per unit of planetary mass.
  Now we have "used" three constants to specify the tilt of the orbital plane [Eq. (18)], the size of the orbit [Eq.
(20)] and the shape of the orbit [Eq. (22a)] and there is no constant to completely specify the orientation of the
orbital plane. This situation is explained by the fact that the orbital plane has to rotate to ensure that a geodesic
test particle does not leave the orbital plane. The pace Ω = dψ
                                                             dt
                                                                with which the intersection line {ϑ = π/2, ϕ = ψ (t)}
of orbital plane and the equatorial plane rotates depends on the instantaneous radial distance r of the test particle:

                                Ω = 1/r.                  (23)

  The movement of the test particle for the case where the orbit has constant r ("circular" orbit) is accurately
modeled by the movement of a point on the rim of a coin that is set to spin on its side on a table. The coin may
start almost upright, slowly falling due to frictional dissipation and decreasing its tilt with respect to the surface
of the table until it lies down flat on the table. In the model space-time, of course, there is no friction and the
initial tilt remains the same forever. While the coin is wobbling on the table, it rolls on its surface, which means
that points on the rim not only take part in the rotation of the plane of the coin, but also in a rotation around the
axis that is perpendicular to the coin, moving up and down and around in a complex dance.
  The movement becomes even more complex if the radial distance is not constant, but it can still be understood
easily if one imagines that the movement takes place in a tilted orbital plane that rotates. Figures 5-6 give depict
a geodesic from these two perspectives.
                                      E. Spin component measurements
   In a Stern-Gerlach experiment the direction in which a spinning particle is deflected depends on the direction of
the force
                                     ∂Bz
              Fz = −∇ (−µ.B) = µz         ,         (24)
                                      ∂z
   where µ is the magnetic moment of the particle associated with the spin of the particle and B is the magnetic
field of the magnet, having a strong gradient ∂Bz /∂z. As seen from the particle's point of view, depending on the
force, the pole where the magnetic field is strongest is either pushed away or attracted by the particle as it passes
through the gap between the poles. This effect is similar to the force exerted on a geodesic test particle in the
model space-time. If we look at Eq. (22a) we can see that the 1/r potential gives rise to either an attractive force
or a repelling force, depending on the sign of X. This close analogy is the reason why we can say that the sign of
X corresponds to the outcome of a spin component measurement.

                                                IV. CONCLUSION

   If we accept that we can not know for sure whether space-time is flat at the scale (in space and time) at which
the Bohm-Aharonov experiment is performed, then we can not evade the conclusion that Bell's and similar proofs,
which are all based on counterfactual statements, do not apply. Non-local angles and other geometric relations over
some distance involving counterfactual set-ups are not measurable and have, even from a realist point of view, no
definite values, because non-local geometric relations in curved space-time require operational definitions, which
are of course not applicable to counterfactual set-ups.
   A proper description of the EPR and Bohm-Aharonov experiments amalgamates the indefiniteness of the tradi-
tional quantum description with the realist point of view of the traditional classical description. Such a description
is in the spirit of general relativity and makes plausible that, contrary to common opinion, the philosophical foun-
dation of general relativity is also fundamental to the proper interpretation of quantum mechanics as a statistical
theory in a non-flat and largely unknown playground.
   An analysis of the results of the Bohm-Aharonov experiment (which are assumed to agree with the predictions
of quantum mechanics) indicates that a hidden variable can be introduced to explain the results, but that the
configuration of three directions (the orientations of the measuring instruments and the direction of the hidden
variable) has one degree of freedom less than expected classically. Classically, given two of the three angles that
identify a configuration, the third angle can be chosen freely from a continuous spectrum. On the other hand,
configurations that are compatible with the predictions of QM restrict the third angle to a bivalent choice. This
restriction is not severe and does not introduce non-locality by itself: even classically the third angle is restricted.
   A model based on the simple, even naive assumption that spin has to do with space time structure with rotational
symmetry in one direction, exhibits geodesic movements with fewer orbit defining constants than are needed for
a Keplerian orbit of a test particle in a central force field. Of the three constants, only one constant defines the
orientation of the orbital plane. Relative to an orbital plane, any other orbital plane can, up to a bivalent choice,
be specified with a single number. Thus the model has exactly the required property to ensure that the predictions
of quantum mechanics can be reproduced.




[1] A. Einstein, B. Podolsky & N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935)
[2] N. Bohr, Phys. Rev, 48, 696 (1935)
[3] D. Bohm and Y. Aharonov, Phys. Rev. 108, 1070 (1957)
[4] J.S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1964)
This figure "fig1.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
This figure "fig2.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
This figure "fig3.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
This figure "fig4.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
This figure "fig5.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
This figure "fig6.gif" is available in "gif" format from:

        http://arxiv.org/ps/quant-ph/0007010v1
