                                                                                     Mathematical Cryptology, 1(1): 1–18



                                         Refined Analysis of the Asymptotic Com-
                                         plexity of the Number Field Sieve
                                         Aude Le Gluher1,* , Pierre-Jean Spaenlehauer1 , Emmanuel Thomé1
                                         1 Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, F-54000 Nancy, France

                                         Received: June 23, 2021 | Revised: June 23, 2021 | Accepted: June 23, 2021

                                         Abstract The classical heuristic complexity of the Number Field Sieve (NFS) involves an unknown function,
                                         usually noted 𝑜(1) and called 𝜉 (𝑁) throughout this paper, which tends to zero as the entry 𝑁 grows. The aim of this
                                         paper is to find optimal asymptotic choices of the parameters of NFS as 𝑁 grows, in order to minimize its heuristic
                                         asymptotic computational cost. This amounts to minimizing a function of the parameters of NFS bound together by
                                         a non-linear constraint. We provide precise asymptotic estimates of the minimizers of this optimization problem,
                                         which yield refined formulas for the asymptotic complexity of NFS. One of the main outcomes of this analysis
                                         is that 𝜉 (𝑁) has a very slow rate of convergence: We prove that it is equivalent to 4logloglog 𝑁/(3loglog 𝑁).
arXiv:2007.02730v2 [cs.CR] 22 Jun 2021




                                         Moreover, 𝜉 (𝑁) has an unpredictable behavior for practical estimates of the complexity. Indeed, we provide an
                                         asymptotic series expansion of 𝜉 and numerical experiments indicate that this series starts converging only for
                                         𝑁 > exp(exp(25)), far beyond the practical range of NFS. This raises doubts on the relevance of NFS running time
                                         estimates that are based on setting 𝜉 = 0 in the asymptotic formula.

                                         Keywords: Complexity, Asymptotic optimization, Number Field Sieve.
                                         2010 Mathematics Subject Classification: 68W40 (Analysis of algorithms), 11Y05 (Factorization).



                                         1 INTRODUCTION
                                              Factoring integers and solving discrete logarithms in finite fields are two fundamental problems in computational
                                         number theory, which are core routines for a very large range of applications. Perhaps their most prominent and
                                         critical use is the fact that the security of many currently deployed cryptosystems — e.g. RSA, finite field Diffie-
                                         Hellman, ElGamal — relies directly on their computational difficulty. This explains why the development of
                                         algorithms for solving these two problems and the analysis of their complexity are central topics in computational
                                         mathematics.
                                              To this day, the Number Field Sieve (NFS) is the most efficient method to factor integers and to compute discrete
                                         logarithms in prime finite fields. It is an active research area, and implementations of NFS have led to several
                                         record computations which give a good idea of the computational power required to factor RSA moduli up to 2800 ,
                                         or to compute discrete logarithms in prime fields of the same size [4]. Existing software can also be used to form
                                         reasonable estimates of the hardness of these problems, up to roughly 1024 bits.
                                              Another approach to estimate the computational power needed is to use a theoretical cost analysis of NFS. The
                                         asymptotic complexity of the usual variant of NFS to factor an integer 𝑁, under various heuristic assumptions, is
                                         known to be                               √︂                                            !
                                                                                    3 64
                                                                              exp        (log 𝑁) 1/3 (log log 𝑁) 2/3 (1 + 𝜉 (𝑁))                            (1)
                                                                                       9
                                         where 𝜉 (𝑁) ∈ 𝑜(1) as 𝑁 grows. This asymptotic formula is obtained by solving an optimization problem, which
                                         involves a number-theoretic function related to the notion of smoothness:
                                         Definition 1. Let 𝑥 ≥ 1 and 𝑦 ≥ 1 be two real numbers. An integer in [1, 𝑥] is 𝑦-smooth if all of its prime factors
                                         are below 𝑦. We let
                                                                        Ψ(𝑥, 𝑦) = #{integers in [1, 𝑥] that are 𝑦-smooth}.
                                         In particular, Ψ(𝑥, 𝑦)/𝑥 is the probability that a uniformly random integer in [1, 𝑥] is 𝑦-smooth. For convenience,
                                         we also use the notation 𝑝(𝑢, 𝑣) = log (Ψ(𝑒 𝑢 , 𝑒 𝑣 )/𝑒 𝑢 ).
                                             Unfortunately, the complexity given by Formula (1) is not very satisfactory. First, it relies on several heuristics,
                                         most notably on the fact that norms of random ideals in a given number field have the same smoothness probability
                                         as random integers of the same order of magnitude. A second point is that even if we consider that these assumptions
                                         hold, the complexity given by Formula (1) involves a function 𝜉 which is never spelled out explicitly.
                                            * Corresponding Author: aude.le-gluher@loria.fr




                                                                                                     1
