                                  Le Gluher, A. & Spaenlehauer, P-J & Thomé E.


    This inaccuracy conflicts with the fact that for the last few decades, the widespread development of public-key
cryptography has created a pressing need to answer the following question: Given some computational power 𝐶,
what size of RSA modulus 𝑁 should be considered so that the cost of NFS exceeds 𝐶? This is of interest, for
example, to regulatory bodies, see for example [17, Sec. 7.5], [1, Sec. B.2.2], or [11, Table 3.1]. A common way to
answer this is to consider the complexity formula, assume that 𝜉 = 0 since we know 𝜉 (𝑁) ∈ 𝑜(1) when 𝑁 grows,
and use a computational record to set a proportionality ratio. Since the 2000s, the validity of this approach has been
considered differently. In [15, §2.4.4], the reader is warned that 𝜉 should not be neglected for large extrapolations,
and omitting it probably yields biased estimations. Later work gradually moved to considering 𝜉 = 0 as a totally
acceptable simplification assumption, not heeding the warning. We emphasize that this method for computing key
sizes is the international standard for deployed RSA-based cryptography.
    The goal of this paper is to question the relevance of neglecting 𝜉 and to give insights on what this function
hides. In particular, assuming the standard heuristics for the complexity of NFS, we show (Thm. 17) that
                                       4logloglog 𝑁 −2 log 2 + log 3/6 − 2
                             𝜉 (𝑁) =               +                       (1 + 𝑜(1)).
                                        3loglog 𝑁         loglog 𝑁
    This asymptotic expansion of 𝜉 can be extended to a bivariate series expansion evaluated at logloglog 𝑁/loglog 𝑁
and 1/loglog 𝑁. We provide algorithms — together with publicly available implementations in SageMath — with
which we were able to compute more than a hundred of terms of this asymptotic expansion. This may sound
like good news for practical formula-based keysize computations, as it seems that this would provide more precise
estimates. In fact, the contrary happens: We observe experimentally that values of 𝑁 that would be useful for
cryptography are far too small compared to the radius of convergence at infinity of the series involved in the
expansion of 𝜉. Said otherwise, this means that the exponent in the classical formula used for estimating practical
RSA key sizes is the first term of a divergent series. In order to illustrate this phenomenon, let us consider the
following example functions:
                                                                                                       
                             
                                     1/3           2/3
                                                                            (log 𝑁) 1/3 (loglog 𝑁) 2/3
             𝑔0 : 𝑁 ↦→ exp (log 𝑁) (loglog 𝑁)            ; 𝑔 : 𝑁 ↦→ exp                                   .
                                                                                 1 + 20/loglog 𝑁

    While it is true that 𝑔 belongs to the class exp((log 𝑁) 1/3 (loglog 𝑁) 2/3 (1 + 𝑜(1))), the radius of convergence
                  Í
of 1/(1 + 𝑥) = 𝑖 (−𝑥) 𝑖 is 1. This implies that if 𝑁 ≤ exp(exp(20)) ≈ 2699945421 , then equalling 𝑜(1) with 0
means estimating the exponent of the function 𝑔 by evaluating the first term of a divergent series. Numerical
computations show that 𝑔(22048 ) ≈ 216 , while 𝑔0 (22048 ) ≈ 261 , so estimating 𝑜(1) by 0 in the case 𝑁 = 22048 yields
completely erroneous results. If one were to compare “projected values” between 𝑁 = 2512 and 𝑁 = 22048 based
on the simplification 𝑜(1) = 0, the corresponding calculation would yield 𝑔0 (22048 )/𝑔0 (2512 ) ≈ 228 , compared to
𝑔(22048 )/𝑔(2512 ) ≈ 29 . Carelessly neglecting the 𝑜(1) term can lead to dramatic errors in the assessment of a
complexity in the class given by Formula (1), and of its growth as 𝑁 varies.
    The asymptotic expansion of 𝜉 that we obtain in the complexity of NFS exhibits a behavior similar to the
example function 𝑔. This raises questions on the relevance of using the asymptotic formula for estimating practical
cryptographic key lengths. In particular, we obtain completely different results for the final NFS complexity
depending on how many terms we consider in our series expansion of 𝜉, see Figure 1. This asks — at the very least
— for strong justification when one chooses to set 𝜉 = 0 in the complexity formula.
    Beyond NFS, the complexity of several algorithms is linked to the asymptotics of smoothness probabilities.
This is the case for example of the quadratic sieve and its variants, of class group computations in number fields,
or of the elliptic curve factoring method. In all of these cases, the methods of this article apply, and yield similar
conclusions; NFS is just an example.

ORGANIZATION OF THE PAPER
    In Section 2, we briefly describe NFS and we state the optimization problem whose minimum is the complexity.
Section 3 provides a refined asymptotic expansion of Dickman–De Bruĳn function at infinity, which is used to
estimate the smoothness probabilities in NFS. Then Section 4 is devoted to the series expansion of the function 𝜉.
Finally, Section 5 reports on experimental results obtained by using the refined asymptotic formulas for the
complexity.

IMPLEMENTATION
   The computation of the asymptotic expansion of 𝜉 relies on three algorithms described in Section 4.3. Our
implementation in SageMath of these algorithms is available at the following URL
                 https://gitlab.inria.fr/NFS_asymptotic_complexity/simulations.


                                                          2
