                                            APPEARED IN BULLETIN OF THE
                                            AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
                                            Volume 26, Number 2, April 1992, Pages 211-244


                                                      ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY


                                                                                  H. W. Lenstra, Jr.
arXiv:math/9204234v1 [math.NT] 1 Apr 1992




                                                  Abstract. In this paper we discuss the basic problems of algorithmic algebraic
                                                  number theory. The emphasis is on aspects that are of interest from a purely mathe-
                                                  matical point of view, and practical issues are largely disregarded. We describe what
                                                  has been done and, more importantly, what remains to be done in the area. We hope
                                                  to show that the study of algorithms not only increases our understanding of alge-
                                                  braic number fields but also stimulates our curiosity about them. The discussion is
                                                  concentrated of three topics: the determination of Galois groups, the determination
                                                  of the ring of integers of an algebraic number field, and the computation of the group
                                                  of units and the class group of that ring of integers.




                                                                                    1. Introduction
                                               The main interest of algorithms in algebraic number theory is that they provide
                                            number theorists with a means of satisfying their professional curiosity. The praise
                                            of numerical experimentation in number theoretic research is as widely sung as
                                            purely numerological investigations are indulged in, and for both activities good
                                            algorithms are indispensable. What makes an algorithm good unfortunately defies
                                            definition—too many extra-mathematical factors affect its practical performance,
                                            such as the skill of the person responsible for its execution and the characteristics
                                            of the machine that may be used.
                                               The present paper addresses itself not to the researcher who is looking for a
                                            collection of well-tested computational methods for use on his recently acquired
                                            personal computer. Rather, the intended reader is the perhaps imaginary pure
                                            mathematician who feels that he makes the most of his talents by staying away
                                            from computing equipment. It will be argued that even from this perspective the
                                            study of algorithms, when considered as objects of research rather than as tools,
                                            offers rich rewards of a theoretical nature.
                                               The problems in pure mathematics that arise in connection with algorithms have
                                            all the virtues of good problems. They are of such a distinctly fundamental nature
                                            that one is often surprised to discover that they have not been considered earlier,
                                            which happens even in well-trodden areas of mathematics; and even in areas that
                                            are believed to be well-understood it occurs frequently that the existing theory
                                            offers no ready solutions, fundamental though the problems may be. Solutions that

                                                Key words and phrases. Algebraic number theory, algorithms, complexity theory.
                                                Received by the editors October 11, 1991
                                                1980 Mathematics Subject Classification (1985 Revision). Primary 11Y16, 11Y40
                                                The author was supported by NSF under Grant No. DMS 90-02939
                                                This paper was given as a Progress in Mathematics Lecture at the August 8–10, 1991 meeting
                                            of the American Mathematical Society in Orono, Maine.

                                                                                                            c 1992 American Mathematical Society
                                                                                                               0273-0979/92 $1.00 + $.25 per page

                                                                                             1
2                                 H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


have been found often need tools that at first sight seem foreign to the statement
of the problem.
    Algebraic number theory has in recent times been applied to the solution of
algorithmic problems that, in their formulations, do not refer to algebraic number
theory at all. That this occurs in the context of solving diophantine equations
(see, e.g., [72]) does not come as a surprise, since these lie at the very roots of
algebraic number theory. A better example is furnished by the seemingly elementary
problem of decomposing integers into prime factors. Among the ingredients that
make modern primality tests work one may mention reciprocity laws in cyclotomic
fields (see [3, 25, 24]), arithmetic in cyclic fields (see [46, 10]), the construction of
Hilbert class fields of imaginary quadratic fields [5], and class number estimates
of fourth degree CM-fields [1]. The best rigorously proved time bound for integer
factorization is achieved by an algorithm that depends on quadratic fields (see
[49]), and the currently most promising practical approach to the same problem,
the number field sieve (see [17, 43, 44]), employs “random” number fields of which
the discriminants are so huge that many traditional computational methods become
totally inapplicable. The analysis of many algorithms related to algebraic number
fields seriously challenges our theoretical understanding, and one is often forced to
argue on the basis of heuristic assumptions that are formulated for the occasion. It is
considered a relief when one runs into a standard conjecture such as the generalized
Riemann hypothesis (as in [6, 15]) or Leopoldt’s conjecture on the nonvanishing of
the p-adic regulator [60].
    In this paper we will consider algorithms in algebraic number theory for their own
sake rather than with a view to any of the above applications. The discussion will be
concentrated on three basic algorithmic questions that one may ask about algebraic
number fields, namely, how to determine the Galois group of the normal closure
of the field, or, more generally, of any polynomial over any algebraic number field;
how to find the ring of integers of the field; and how to determine the unit group
and the ideal class group of that ring of integers. These are precisely the subjects
that are discussed in Algorithmic algebraic number theory by M. Pohst and H.
Zassenhaus (Cambridge, 1989), but our point of view is completely different. Pohst
and Zassenhaus present algorithms that “yield good to excellent results for number
fields of small degree and not too large discriminant” [56, Preface], but our attitude
will be decidedly and exclusively asymptotic. For the purposes of the present paper
one algorithm is considered better than another if, for each positive real number
N , it is at least N times as fast for all but finitely many values of the input data.
It is clear that with this attitude we can make no claims concerning the practical
applicability of any of the results that are achieved. In fact, following Archimedes
[4] one should be able, on the basis of current physical knowledge, to find an upper
estimate for all sets of numerical input data to which any algorithm will ever be
applied, and an algorithm that is faster in all those finitely many instances may
still be worse in our sense.
    To some people the above attitude may seem absurd. To the intended reader,
who is never going to apply any algorithm anyway, it comes as a liberation and a
relief. Once he explicitly gives up all practical claims he will realize that he can
occupy himself with algorithms without having to fear the bad dreams caused by
the messy details and dirty tricks that stand between an elegant algorithmic idea
and its practical implementation. He will find himself in the platonic paradise of
pure mathematics, where a conceptual and concise version of an algorithm is valued
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                             3

more highly than an ad hoc device that speeds it up by a factor of ten and where
words have precise meanings that do not change with the changing world. He will
never need to enter the dark factories that in his imagination are populated by
applied mathematicians, where boxes full of numbers that they call matrices are
carried around and where true electronic computers are fed with proliferating triple
indices. And in his innermost self he will know that in the end his own work will
turn out to have the widest application range, exactly because it was not done with
any specific application in mind.
    There is a small price to be paid for admission to this paradise. Algorithms and
their running times can only be investigated mathematically if they are given exact
definitions, and this can apparently be done only if one employs the terminology
of theoretical computer science, which our intended reader unfortunately does not
feel comfortable with either. It is only out of respect for his feelings that I have
not called this paper Complexity of algorithms in algebraic number theory, which
would have described its contents more accurately.
    Although it is, from a rigorous mathematical point of view, desirable that I define
what I mean by an algorithm and its running time, I will not do so. My main excuse
is that I do not know these definitions myself. Even worse, I never saw a treatment
of the appropriate theory that is precise, elegant, and convenient to work with. It
would be a laudable enterprise to fill this apparent gap in the literature. In the
meantime, I am happy to show by example that one can avoid paying the admission
price, just as not all algebraists are experts on set theory or algebraic geometers
on category theory. The intuitive understanding that one has of algorithms and
running times, or of sets and categories, is amply sufficient. Exact definitions
appear to be necessary only when one wishes to prove that algorithms with certain
properties do not exist, and theoretical computer science is notoriously lacking in
such negative results. The reader who wishes to provide his own definitions may
wish to consult [74] for an account of the pitfalls to be avoided. He should bear in
mind that all theorems in the present paper should become formal consequences of
his definitions, which makes his task particularly academic.
    My intended reader may have another allergy, namely, for constructive mathe-
matics, in which purely existential proofs and the law of the excluded middle are not
accepted. This has only a superficial relationship to algorithmic mathematics. Of
course, it often happens that one can obtain a good algorithm by just transcribing
an essentially constructive proof, but such algorithms do not tend to be the most
interesting ones; many of them are mentioned in §2. In the design and analysis of
algorithms one gladly invokes all the help that existing pure mathematics has to
offer and often some not-yet-existing mathematics as well.
    For an account of algorithms in algebraic number theory that emphasizes the
practical aspects rather than complexity issues we refer to the forthcoming book
by Cohen [23].
    In §2 we cover the basic terminology and the basic auxiliary results to be used in
later sections. In particular, we discuss several fundamental questions that, unlike
integer factorization, admit a satisfactory algorithmic treatment. These include
questions related to finitely generated abelian groups, to finite fields, and to the
factorization of polynomials over number fields.
    Section 3 is devoted to the problem of determining Galois groups. We review
the little that has been done on the complexity of this problem, including the
pretty result of Landau and Miller [36] that solvability by radicals can be decided
4                                  H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


efficiently. We also point out several directions for further research.
    In §4 we discuss the problem of determining the ring of integers of a given
algebraic number field. The main result is a negative one—the problem is in many
ways equivalent to the problem of finding the largest square factor of a given positive
integer, which is intractable at present. Nevertheless, we will see that one can get
quite close. There is an interesting connection with the resolution of plane curve
singularities that remains to be exploited.
    Section 5 considers the problem of determining the unit group O∗ and the ideal
class group Cl O of the ring of integers O of a given number field. Showing that these
are effectively computable is not entirely trivial, and since most textbooks are silent
on this point, I treat it in some detail. We shall see that the existing complexity
estimates for this problem still leave room for improvement, and what we have to
say is far from conclusive. In §6 we prove a few explicit bounds concerning units and
class groups that are needed in §5. Several results in these two sections could have
been formulated in terms of the divisor class group Picc O that appears in Arakelov
theory (see [70, §I]) and that already appeared in the context of algorithms (see [65,
45]). Knowing the group Picc O is equivalent to knowing both O∗ and Cl O, which
may explain why algorithms for computing O∗ and algorithms for computing Cl O
are often inextricably linked. It also explains why, contrary to many authors in the
field, I prefer to think of determining O∗ and determining Cl O as a single problem.
    The three basic questions that are addressed in this progress report still offer
ample opportunities for additional progress. Among the many other algorithmic
questions in algebraic number theory that merit attention we mention the problem
of tabulating number fields, problems from class field theory such as the calculation
of Artin symbols, problems concerning quadratic forms, and the analogues of all
problems discussed in this paper for function fields of curves over finite fields.

                                  2. Preliminaries
2.1. Algorithms and complexity. It is assumed that the reader has an intuitive
understanding of the notion of an algorithm as being a recipe that given one finite
sequence of nonnegative integers, called the input data, produces another, called
the output. Formally, an algorithm may be defined as a Turing machine, but for
several of our results it is better to choose as our “machine model” an idealized
computer that is more realistic with respect to its running time, which is another
intuitively clear notion that we do not define. We refer to [74] and the literature
given there for a further discussion of these points.
   TheP length of a finite sequence of nonnegative integers n1 , n2 , . . . , nt is defined
          t
to be i=1 log(ni + 2). It must informally be thought of as proportional to the
number of bits needed to spell out the ni in binary. By analyzing the complexity
of an algorithm we mean in this paper finding a reasonably sharp upper bound for
the running time of the algorithm expressed as a function of the length of the input
data. This should, more precisely, be called time complexity, to distinguish it from
space complexity. An algorithm is said to be polynomial-time or good if its running
time is (l + 2)O(1) , where l is the length of the input. Studying the complexity
of a problem means finding an algorithm for that problem of the smallest possible
complexity. In the present paper we consider the complexity analysis complete
when a good algorithm for a problem has been found, and we will not be interested
in the value of the O-constant. Informally, a problem has a good algorithm if an
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            5

instance of the problem is almost as easily solved as it is formulated.
   Sometimes we will refer to a probabilistic algorithm, which is an algorithm that
may use a random number generator for drawing random bits. One formalization
of this is a nondeterministic Turing machine (see [74]). Unless we use the word
probabilistic, we do not allow the use of random number generators, and if we wish
to emphasize this we talk of deterministic algorithms. In the case of a probabilistic
algorithm, the running time and the output are not determined by the input alone,
but both have, for each fixed value of the input data, a distribution. The expected
running time of a probabilistic algorithm is the expectation of the running time for
a given input. Studying the complexity of a probabilistic algorithm means finding
an upper bound for the expected running time as a function of the length of the
input. For a few convenient rules that can be used for this purpose we refer to
[49, §12]. A probabilistic algorithm is called good if its expected running time is
(l + 2)O(1) , where l is the length of the input.
   Parallel algorithms have not yet played any role in algorithmic number theory,
and they will not be considered here.
   Many results in this paper assert that “there exists” an algorithm with certain
properties. In all cases, such an algorithm can actually be exhibited, at least in
principle.
   All O-constants are absolute and effectively computable unless indicated other-
wise.
2.2. Encoding data. As stated above, the input and the output of an algorithm
consist of finite sequences of nonnegative integers. However, in the mathematical
practice of thinking and writing about algorithms one prefers to work with math-
ematical concepts rather than with sequences of nonnegative integers that encode
them in some manner. Thus, one likes to say that the input of an algorithm is
given by an algebraic number field rather than by the sequence of coefficients of
a polynomial that defines the field; and it is both shorter and clearer to say that
one computes the kernel of a certain endomorphism of a vector space than that one
determines a matrix of which the columns express a basis for that kernel in terms
of a given basis of the vector space. To justify such a concise mode of expression
we have to agree on a way of encoding entities such as number fields, vector spaces,
and maps between them by means of finite sequences of nonnegative integers. That
is one of the purposes of the remainder of this section. Sometimes there is one obvi-
ous way to do the encoding, but often there are several, in which case the question
arises whether there is a good algorithm that passes from one encoding to another.
When there is, we will usually not distinguish between the encodings, although for
practical purposes they need not be equivalent.
    We shall see that the subject of encoding mathematical entities suggests several
basic questions, but we will not pursue these systematically. We shall not do much
more than what will be needed in later sections.
2.3. Elementary arithmetic. By Z we denote the ring of integers. Adding a sign
bit we can clearly use nonnegative integers to represent all integers. The traditional
algorithms for addition and subtraction take time O(l), where l is the length of the
input. The ordinary algorithms for multiplication and division with remainder, as
well as the Euclidean algorithm for the computation of greatest common divisors,
have running time O(l2 ). With the help of more sophisticated methods this can be
improved to l1+o(1) for l → ∞ (see [33]). An operation that is not known to be
6                                H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


doable by means of a good algorithm is decomposing a positive integer into prime
numbers (see [33, 50, 41]), but there is a good probabilistic algorithm for the related
problem of deciding whether a given integer is prime [1]. No good algorithms are
known for the problem of recognizing squarefree numbers and the problem of finding
the largest square dividing a given positive integer, even when the word “good” is
given a less formal meaning (see [43, §2]).
   For some algorithms a prime number p is part of the input. In such a case, the
prime is assumed to be encoded by itself rather than that, for example, n stands
for the nth prime. Since we know no good deterministic algorithm for recognizing
primes, it is natural to ask what the algorithm does if p is not prime or at least not
known to be prime. Some algorithms may discover that p is nonprime, either be-
cause a known property of primes is contradicted in the course of the computations,
or because the algorithm spends more time than it should; such algorithms may be
helpful as primality tests. Other algorithms may even give a nontrivial factor of p,
which may make them applicable as integer factoring algorithms. For both types
of algorithms, one can ask what can be deduced if the algorithm does appear to
terminate successfully. Does this assist us in proving that p is prime? What do we
know about the output when we do not assume that p is prime? An algorithm for
which this question has not been answered satisfactorily is Schoof’s algorithm for
counting the number of points on an elliptic curve over a finite field [62].
   Rational numbers can be represented as pairs of integers in an obvious manner,
and all field operations can be performed on them in polynomial time.
   Let n be a positive integer. The elements of the ring Z/nZ are assumed to be
encoded as nonnegative integers less than n. The ring operations can be performed
in polynomial time. An ideal I ⊂ Z/nZ can be encoded either by means of its
index d = [Z/nZ : I], which completely determines it and which can be any divisor
of n, or by means of a finite sequence of elements that generates I, or by means
of a single generator. An element of I can be represented either as an element of
Z/nZ that is divisible by d, or as an explicit Z/nZ-linear combination of the given
generators of I, or as an explicit multiple of a single given generator. Using the
extended Euclidean algorithm one easily sees that one can pass from any of these
encodings of ideals and their elements to any other in polynomial time and that
one can likewise test inclusion and equality of given ideals. In particular, one can
decide in polynomial time whether a given nonzero element of Z/nZ is a unit, if
so find its inverse, and if not so find a nontrivial divisor of n. Taking n = p to
be prime we conclude that we can perform all field operations in Fp = Z/pZ in
polynomial time.

2.4. Linear algebra. Let F be a field, and suppose that one has agreed upon an
encoding of its elements, as is the case when F is the field Q of rational numbers
or the field Fp for some prime number p (see 2.3). Giving a finite-dimensional
vector space over F simply means giving a nonnegative integer n, which is the
dimension of the vector space. This number n is to be given in unary, i.e., as
a sequence 1, 1, . . . , 1 of n ones, so that the length of the encoding is at least
n. This is because almost any algorithm related to a vector space of dimension
n takes time at least n. The elements of such a vector space are encoded as se-
quences of n elements of F . Homomorphisms between vector spaces are encoded as
matrices. A subspace of a vector space can be encoded as a sequence of elements
that spans the subspace, or as a sequence of elements that forms a basis of the
                    ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                                 7

subspace, or as the kernel of a homomorphism from the vector space to another
one. For all fields F that we shall consider the traditional algorithms from linear
algebra, which are based on Gaussian elimination, are polynomial-time: algorithms
that pass back and forth between different representations of subspaces, algorithms
that decide inclusion and equality of subspaces, that form sums and intersections
of subspaces, algorithms that construct quotient spaces, direct sums, and tensor
products, algorithms for computing determinants and characteristic polynomials
of endomorphisms, and algorithms that decide whether a given homomorphism is
invertible and if so construct its inverse. The proofs are straightforward, the main
problem being to find upper bounds for the sizes of the numbers that occur in the
computations, for example when F = Q.
   If one applies any of these algorithms to F = Z/pZ without knowing that p is
prime, then one either finds a nontrivial divisor of p because some division by a
nonzero element fails, or the algorithm performs successfully as if F were a field. In
the latter case it is usually easy to interpret the output of the algorithm in terms
of free Z/pZ-modules (see [14]), thus avoiding the assumption that p be prime.
2.5. Finitely generated abelian groups. Specifying a finitely generated abelian
group isL done by giving a sequence of nonnegative integers d1 , d2 , . . . , dt ; the group
            t
is then     i=1 Z/di Z, which enables us to represent the elements of the group by
means of sequences of t integers. In our applications the group is usually either
finite (all di > 0) or free abelian (all di = 0). To make the di unique one may
require that di divides di+1 for 1 ≤ i < t; this can be accomplished in polynomial
time. One should not require the di to be prime powers, since that is, for all we
know, algorithmically hard to achieve. Starting from this description of finitely
generated abelian groups, one can encode maps and subgroups in various ways
that are reminiscent of 2.4 and that are left to the imagination of the reader. He
may also formulate the analogues of the problems mentioned in 2.4 for the current
case and construct good algorithms for them using Hermite and Smith reduction of
integer matrices (see [29]). The main difficulty is to keep the intermediate numbers
small.

2.6. Basis reduction. In many cases a finitely generated free abelian group L
is equipped with a bilinear symmetric map L × L → R that induces a Euclidean
structure on LR = L ⊗Z R; here R denotes the field of real numbers. For example,
this is the case if L is a subgroup of Zn , with the ordinary inner product. It is also
the case if L is a finitely generated subgroup of the additive group of an algebraic
number fieldPK (see 2.9), the bilinear symmetric map in this case being induced
by (x, x) = σ |σx|2 , where σ ranges over the field homomorphisms from K to the
field C of complex numbers. In such cases it is often desirable to find a reduced
basis of L over Z, i.e., a basis of which the elements are “short” in a certain sense.
If the symmetric matrix that defines the bilinear map on a given basis of L is known
to a certain accuracy, then a reduced basis can be found by means of a reduction
algorithm. The complexity of such an algorithm depends on the precise notion of
“reduced basis” that one employs. In [42] one finds a good reduction algorithm
that will suffice for our purposes. See [30] for further developments.
2.7. Rings. We use the convention that rings have unit elements, that a subring
has the same unit element, and that ring homomorphisms preserve the unit element.
The characteristic char A of a ring A is the nonnegative integer that generates the
8                                 H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


kernel of the unique ring homomorphism Z → A. The group of units of a ring A is
denoted by A∗ . All rings in this paper are supposed to be commutative.
    Almost any ring that we need to encode in this paper has an additive group that is
either finitely generated or a finite-dimensional vector space over Q; for exceptions,
see 2.11. Such a ring A is encoded by giving its underlying abelian group as in 2.5
or 2.4 together with the multiplication map A ⊗ A → A. It is straightforward to
decide in polynomial time whether the multiplication map satisfies the ring axioms.
    Ideals are encoded as subgroups or, equivalently, as kernels of ring homomor-
phisms. There are good algorithms for computing the sum, product, and intersec-
tion of ideals, as well as the ideal I : J = {x ∈ A: xJ ⊂ I} for given I and J, and
the quotient ring of A modulo a given ideal.
    A polynomial over a ring is always supposed to be given by means of a complete
list of its coefficients, including the zero coefficients; thus we do not work with
sparse polynomials of a very high degree.
    Most finite rings that have been encountered in algorithmic number theory “try
to be fields” in the sense that one is actually happy to find a zero-divisor in the
ring. This applies to the way they occur in §4 and also to the application of finite
rings in primality testing [46, 10]. Nevertheless, it seems of interest to study finite
rings from an algorithmic point of view for their own sake. Testing whether a
given finite ring is local can be done by a good probabilistic algorithm, but finding
the localizations looks very difficult. Testing whether it is reduced or a principal
ideal ring also looks very difficult, but there may be a good algorithm for deciding
whether it is quasi-Frobenius. I do not know whether isomorphism can be tested
in polynomial time. Many difficulties are already encountered for finite rings that
are Fp -algebras for some prime number p. Two finite étale Fp -algebras can be
tested for isomorphism in polynomial time (cf. [14]), but there is no known good
deterministic algorithm for finding the isomorphism if it exists; if they are fields,
there is, but the proof depends on ring theory (see [48]).

2.8. Finite fields. Let p be a prime number, n a positive integer, and q = pn .
A finite field Fq of cardinality q is encoded as a ring, as in 2.7. This comes down
to specifying p, n, as well as a system of n3 elements aijk of Fp withP    the property
that there is a basis e1 , e2 , . . . , en of Fq over Fp such that ei ej = k aijk ek for
all i, j. We refer to [48] for a description of good algorithms for various funda-
mental problems: performing the field operations in a given finite field, as well
as exponentiation and the application of automorphisms; finding all subfields of a
given finite field Fq , finding the irreducible polynomial of a given element of Fq
over a given subfield, finding a primitive element of Fq , i.e., an element α ∈ Fq
with Fq = Fp (α), finding a normal basis of Fq over a given subfield, and finding all
field homomorphisms and isomorphisms from a given finite field to another. Most
of these algorithms rely heavily on linear algebra.
    Given a positive integer p and a system of n3 elements aijk of Z/pZ, how does one
decide whether they specify a field Fq as above? This is at least as hard as testing
p for primality, for which no good deterministic algorithm is known. However, this
is the only obstruction: there is a good algorithm that given p and the aijk either
shows that they do not define a field, or shows that if p is prime they do. Namely,
one runs the algorithms mentioned above for finding a primitive element α and its
minimal polynomial f over Z/pZ, just as if one is working with a field, and one
verifies that the map sending X to α induces an isomorphism from (Z/pZ)[X]/(f )
                    ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                             9

to the structure that one is working with; if this is not true, or if anything went
wrong during the course of the algorithm, one does not have a field; if it is, then as
a final test one decides whether f is irreducible over Z/pZ, which for prime p can
be done by means of a good algorithm (see [38, 47] and the references given there).
    There are also problems for which no good algorithm is known. One is the
problem of constructing Fpn for a given prime p and a given positive integer n, or,
equivalently, constructing an irreducible polynomial f ∈ Fp [X] of degree n; here n
is supposed to be given in unary (cf. 2.4). If one accepts the generalized Riemann
hypothesis then there is a good algorithm for doing this [2]. There is also a good
probabilistic algorithm for this problem, and a deterministic algorithm that runs in
√
   p times polynomial time [66].
    An important problem, which will come up several times in this paper, is the
problem of factoring a given polynomial f in one variable over a given finite field
Fpn . No good algorithm is known for this problem, even when the generalized
Riemann hypothesis is assumed. There does exist a good probabilistic algorithm
                                                √
and a deterministic algorithm that runs in p times polynomial time [67]; if p is
fixed, or smaller than the degree of f , then the latter algorithm is good. There also
exists a good algorithm that, given f ∈ Fpn [X], determines the factorization type
of f , i.e., the number of irreducible factors and their degrees and multiplicities. We
refer to [47] for a further discussion.
    Algorithmic problems relating to the multiplicative group of finite fields, such as
the discrete logarithm problem, are generally very difficult, see [53, 57, 41, 27, 60,
51].

2.9. Number fields. By a number field or an algebraic number field we mean in
this paper a field extension K of finite degree of the field Q of rational numbers.
For the basic theory of algebraic number fields, see [37, 75, 20].
    An algebraic number field K is encoded as its underlying Q-vector space together
with the multiplication map K ⊗Q K → K, as in 2.7; in other words, giving K
amounts to giving a positive integer n and a system of n3 rational numbers aijk
that describe the multiplication in K on a vector space basis of K over Q (cf. 2.8
above). As in [48, §2], one shows that the field operations in a number field can
be performed in polynomial time. Using standard arguments from field theory one
shows that there are good algorithms for determining the irreducible polynomial of
a given element of K over a given subfield and for finding a primitive element of K,
i.e., an element α ∈ K for which K = Q(α). It follows that giving a number field
is equivalent to giving an irreducible polynomial f ∈ Q[X] and letting the field be
Q[X]/f Q[X].
    Polynomials in one variable with coefficients in an algebraic number field can be
factored into irreducible factors in polynomial time. This is done with the help of
basis reduction, see [42, 35, 39, 40]. We note two consequences.
    First of all, from the argument given in 2.8 one sees that there is a good algorithm
for deciding whether a given system of n3 rational numbers defines a number field.
Secondly, given two number fields K = Q(α) and K ′ , one can decide whether
or not they are isomorphic, and if so, find all isomorphisms, in polynomial time.
To do this, one factors the irreducible polynomial f of α over Q into irreducible
factors in the ring K ′ [X], and one observes that the linear factors are in bijective
correspondence with the field homomorphisms K → K ′ ; such a field homomorphism
is an isomorphism if and only if the two fields have the same degree over Q.
10                                 H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


   With K = K ′ we see from the above that one can also determine all automor-
phisms of K, and composing them one can make a complete multiplication table
for the group Aut K of field automorphisms of K, all in polynomial time.
   In the proof of 3.5 we shall see that all maximal proper subfields of a given
number field of degree n can be found in polynomial time. Finding all subfields
is asking too much, since the number of subfields is not polynomially bounded.
I do not know whether all minimal subfields different from Q can be found in
polynomial time, nor whether their number is nO(1) . Intersections and composites
of given subfields can be found by means of linear algebra.
   We stress that for our algorithms the number field K is considered to be variable
rather than fixed, and that we wish our running time estimates to be uniform in
K.
2.10. Orders. An order in a number field K of degree n is a subring A of K
of which the additive group is isomorphic to Zn . Among all orders in K there is
a unique maximal one, which is called the ring of integers of K and denoted by
O. The orders in K are precisely the subrings of O of finite additive index. The
discriminant ∆A of an order A with Z-basis ω1 , ω2 , . . . , ωn is the determinant of the
matrix (Tr(ωi ωj ))i,j , where Tr: K → Q is the trace map. The discriminant of every
order is a nonzero integer. The discriminant of O is also called the discriminant of
K over Q and is simply denoted by ∆.
   There are several ways of encoding an order A in a number field K. One is
by specifying A as a ring as in 2.7, which amounts to giving n and a system of
n3 integers aijk ; from A ⊗Z Q ∼   = K it follows that the same data also encode K.
Another is by specifying K as well as a sequence of elements of K that generates
A as a ring, or as an abelian group. We leave it to the reader to check that there
are good algorithms for transforming all these encodings into each other.
   Given a number field K one can construct an order in K in polynomial time,
as follows. Let n3 rational numbers aijk be given that describe the multiplication
on a Q-basis e1 = 1, e2 , . . . , en for K, and let dPbe the least common multiple
                                                         n
of the denominators of the aijk . Then A = Z + i=2 Zdei is an order in K. In
many cases one knows the irreducible polynomial f of a primitive element α of K
over Q. If f ∈ Z[X], then one can take for A the “equation order” Z[α], which
as a ring is isomorphic to Z[X]/f Z[X]. If f does not belong to Z[X], then one
can either replace α by mα for a suitable positive integer m, or use a little known
generalization of the equation order, namely, the ring

                                             n−1           n−1
                            (                                         )
                                             X             X
                                                       i          i
                       A=       β ∈ K: β ·         Zα ⊂          Zα       .
                                             i=0           i=0


To find a Z-basis for this
                      Pn ring, let m be the least positive integer for which the
polynomial g = mf = i=0 ai X i has coefficients ai in Z (with an = m); then
                                                                
                                    n−1
                                    X            i−1
                                                 X
                         A=Z+             Z·          an−j αi−j  .
                                    i=1          j=0


These are exactly the rings A for which Spec A is isomorphic to a “horizontal” prime
divisor of the projective line over Z. Many results that are known for equation
                    ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            11

orders have direct analogues for rings of this type; for example, the discriminant of
A equals the discriminant of g.
   Applying basis reduction to a given order A as in 2.6, one can find a Z-basis for A
with the property that the integers aijk that express multiplication in this basis sat-
isfy aijk = |∆A |O(n) . This shows that A can be encoded by means of data of length
O(n4 (2 + log |∆A |)), and that there is a good algorithm for transforming a given
encoding into one satisfying this bound. From the inequality n ≤ 2(log |∆A |)/ log 3,
which is valid for all A 6= Z, one sees that the bound is (2 + log |∆A |)O(1) . It is
often convenient to assume that the given encoding of A satisfies this bound, and
to estimate running times in terms of |∆A |.
   Let A be an order in a number field K of degree n. By a fractional ideal of A
we mean a finitely generated nonzero A-submodule of K. The additive group of
a fractional ideal is isomorphic to Zn . One can compute with fractional ideals as
with ideals (see 2.7).
2.11. Local fields. A local field is a locally compact, nondiscrete topological field.
Such a field is topologically isomorphic to the field R of real numbers, or to the
field C of complex numbers, or, for some prime number p, to a finite extension of
the field Qp of p-adic numbers, or, for some finite field E, to the field E((t)) of
formal Laurent series over E. A local field is uncountable, which implies that we
have to be satisfied with specifying its elements only to a certain precision. The
discussion below is limited to the case that the field is non-archimedean, i.e., not
isomorphic to R or C.
    The complexity theory of local fields has not been developed as systematically
as one might expect on the basis of their importance in number theory (see [19]).
The first thing to do is to develop algorithms for factoring polynomials in one
variable to a given precision; see [21, 14] and §4 below. Here the incomplete solution
of the corresponding problem over finite fields (see 2.8) causes a difficulty; we
are forced to admit probabilistic algorithms, or to allow the running time to be
√
   p times polynomial time, where p denotes the characteristic of the residue class
field, or to avoid the need for completely factoring polynomials. Once one can
factor polynomials, it is likely that satisfactory algorithms can be developed for the
calculation of ramification indices and residue class field degrees of finite extensions
of non-archimedean local fields. Some further problems are mentioned at the end
of §3.

                                 3. Galois groups
  In this section we are concerned with the following problem.
Problem 3.1. Given an algebraic number field K and a nonzero polynomial f ∈
K[X], determine the Galois group G of f over K. Can this be done in polynomial
time?
   In the sequel we will always assume that the polynomial f is squarefree. This can
be accomplished by means of a good algorithm, which replaces f by f / gcd(f, f ′ ).
We denote the degree of f by n.
   We should specify how we want the algorithm to describe G. One possibility is to
require that the algorithm comes up with a complete multiplication table of a finite
group that is isomorphic to G, but this has an important shortcoming. Namely,
the group may be very large in comparison to the length of the input, and it may
12                               H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


not be possible to write down such a complete multiplication table in polynomial
time, let alone calculate it. If we insist on a complete multiplication table, then
“polynomial time” in Problem 3.1 should be taken to mean: polynomial time in the
combined lengths of the input plus output. Theorem 3.2 below shows that Problem
3.1 does in this sense have a polynomial time solution.
   If we are interested in more efficient algorithms, we should look for a more concise
way of describing G. For this, we view G as a permutation group of the zeroes of
f rather than as an abstract group. Numbering the zeroes we see that G may be
regarded as a subgroup of the symmetric group Sn of order n!; this subgroup is
determined only up to conjugacy due to the arbitrary choice of the numbering of
the zeroes. Instead of asking for a multiplication table of G we shall ask for a list
of elements of Sn that generate G. Every subgroup of Sn has a system of at most
n − 1 generators (see [52, Lemma 5.2]), and these can be specified using O(n2 log n)
bits. This is bounded by a polynomial function of the length of the input, since the
latter is at least n.
   This formulation of the problem still leaves something to be desired; namely,
we do not ask how the numbering of the zeroes of f is related to other ways in
which zeroes of f may be specified: for example, as complex numbers to a certain
precision, for a suitable embedding K → C, or similarly as p-adic numbers for a
suitable prime number p, or as elements of an abstractly defined splitting field or of
one of its subfields. However, even without such a refined formulation the problem
appears to be hard enough.
   It should be remarked that a set of generators of a subgroup G of Sn can be used
to answer, in polynomial time, several natural questions about G. For example,
one can determine its order; one can decide whether a given element of Sn belongs
to G; one can, for a given prime p, determine generators for a Sylow p-subgroup of
G; one can find a composition series for G and name the isomorphism types of its
composition factors; in particular, one can decide whether G is solvable. For more
examples, proofs, and references, see [32]. It may be that some of the ideas that
underlie this theory, which depends on the classification of finite simple groups, will
play a role in a possible solution of Problem 3.1.
   The following result, due to Landau [35], expresses that the possibility that G is
very large is the only obstruction to finding a good algorithm for Problem 3.1.
Theorem 3.2. There is a deterministic algorithm that given K and f as in Prob-
lem 3.1 and a positive integer b decides whether the Galois group G has order at
most b, and if so gives a complete list of elements of G, and that runs in time
(b + l)O(1) , where l is the length of the data specifying K and f .
    The algorithm is obtained from the standard textbook construction of a splitting
field of f over K. One first factors f into irreducible factors in K[X]. If all factors
are linear, then the splitting field is K itself. Otherwise, one passes to the field
L = K[X]/gK[X], where g is one of the nonlinear irreducible factors of f . Then a
splitting field of f over L is also one over K, so applying the algorithm recursively
one can determine a splitting field of f over K. If at any stage during the recursion
it happens that one obtains a field that has degree larger than b over the initial
field K, then #G > b, and one stops. If this does not happen, then one eventually
arrives at a splitting field M of f over K. As in 2.9 one can determine the group
Gal(M/K) of all K-automorphisms of M , and this is G. It is then easy to make a
multiplication table for G and to find an embedding of G into the symmetric group
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                          13

of the set of zeroes of f .
   One sees from Theorem 3.2 that G can be determined in time (#G+l)O(1) . Since
#G ≤ n!, it follows that for bounded n Problem 3.1 is solved in the sense that there
is a polynomial time solution. This is an example of a complexity result that does
not adequately reflect the practical situation: the practical problem of determining
Galois groups is not considered to be well solved, even though the algorithms that
are actually used nowadays always require n to be bounded—in fact, each value
of n typically has its own algorithm (cf. [69, 26]), which does not follow the crude
approach outlined above.
Corollary 3.3. There is a good algorithm that given K and f decides whether G
is abelian, and determines G if G is abelian and f is irreducible.
    For irreducible f this is easily deduced from Theorem 3.2 with b = n, since a
transitive abelian permutation group of degree n has order n. For reducible f one
uses that the Galois group of f is abelian if and only if the Galois group of each
irreducible factor of f is abelian.
    For reducible f , this algorithm does not determine the Galois group, and it is
not clear whether this can be done in polynomial time. The following problem
illustrates the difficulty.
Problem 3.4. Given an algebraic
                             Qt number field K and elements a1 , a2 , . . . , at ∈ K,
determine the Galois group of i=1 (X 2 − ai ) over K. Is there a good algorithm
for doing this?
   For K = Q this is indeed possible. For general algebraic number fields one can
probably do it if one assumes the generalized Riemann hypothesis. Without such
an assumption already the case that all ai are units of the ring of integers of K is
difficult to handle. In any case, the algorithm from Theorem 3.2 is in general too
slow.
   The following pretty result is due to Landau and Miller [36]. It shows that one
can decide in polynomial time whether f is solvable by radicals over K.
Corollary 3.5. There is a good algorithm that given K and f decides whether G
is solvable.
   As in the proof of Corollary 3.3, we may assume that f is irreducible. If there
were a bound of the form nO(1) for the order of a solvable transitive permutation
group of degree n, then we could proceed in the same way as for abelian groups.
However, no such bound exists, since for every integer k ≥ 0 there is a solvable
transitive permutation group of degree n = 2k and order 2n−1 . Instead, one uses
that the order of a primitive solvable permutation group of degree n does have an
upper bound of the form nO(1) (see [54]). By Galois theory, the Galois group G of
f is primitive if and only if there are no nontrivial intermediate fields between K
and K(α), where f (α) = 0. To reduce the general case to this situation, it suffices
to find a chain of fields K = K0 ⊂ K1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Kt = K(α) that cannot be refined,
since G is solvable if and only if for each i the Galois closure of Ki ⊂ Ki+1 has a
solvable Galois group. Such a chain can be found inductively if one can, among all
intermediate fields K ⊂ L ⊂ K(α) with L 6= K(α), find a maximal one. This is
done as follows. Factor the polynomial f into monic irreducible factors over K(α).
One of the factors is X − α. For each other irreducible factor g we define a subfield
Lg 6= K(α) containing K as follows. If g is linear, g = X − β, then K(α) has a
14                               H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


unique K-automorphism σ with σα = β, and we let Lg be the field of invariants
of σ. If g is nonlinear, then let β be a zero of g in an extension field of K(α), and
Lg = K(α) ∩ K(β). I claim that all maximal subfields are among the Lg , so that
we can find a maximal subfield by choosing a field Lg with the largest degree over
K. The correctness of the claim follows by Galois theory from the following purely
group theoretic statement. Let G be a finite group, H ⊂ J ⊂ G subgroups with
H 6= J, and assume that there is no subgroup I of G with H ⊂ I ⊂ J, H 6= I 6= J;
then there exists σ ∈ G − H such that

                               hH, σi = J    if σHσ −1 = H,
                         hH, σHσ −1 i = J    if σHσ −1 6= H.

In fact, it suffices to choose σ ∈ J − H.
   This concludes the sketch of the proof of Corollary 3.5. Note that the algorithm
does not determine the group G if it is solvable, even if f is irreducible. One does
obtain the prime divisors of #G if G is solvable.
   Theorem 3.2 suggests that the largest groups are the hardest to determine. How-
ever, the following result, which is taken from [34], shows that the very largest ones
can actually be dealt with in polynomial time. As above, let Sn denote the full
symmetric group of degree n, and let An be the alternating group of degree n.
Theorem 3.6. There is a good algorithm that given K and f decides whether the
Galois group of f is Sn and whether or not it is An .
    For this, one may by the above assume that n ≥ 8. From the classification of
finite simple groups it follows (see [18]) that the only sixfold transitive permutation
groups of degree n are An and Sn . Hence, if we build up the splitting field of f over
K as in the proof of Theorem 3.2, then G is An or Sn if and only if after adjoining six
zeroes of f one has obtained an extension of degree n(n−1)(n−2)(n−3)(n−4)(n−5).
One can distinguish between An and Sn by computing the discriminant ∆f of f —
this comes down to evaluating a determinant, which can be done in polynomial
time—and checking whether X 2 − ∆f has a zero in K.
    In a similar way one can decide in polynomial time whether G is doubly tran-
sitive. If G is doubly transitive, one can determine the isomorphism type of the
unique minimal normal subgroup of G in polynomial time, a result that is due to
Kantor [31]. If one attempts to determine G itself, one runs into the following
problem, which was suggested by Kantor.
Problem 3.7. Is there a polynomial time algorithm that given K and f as in
Problem 3.1 and a prime number p decides whether G has a normal subgroup of
index p?
   Even for p = 2 this appears to be difficult.
   Resolvent polynomials, such as X 2 − ∆f in the proof of Theorem 3.6, play a
much more important role in practical algorithms for determining Galois groups
than in known complexity results (see [69, 26]).
Problem 3.8. Is there a way to exploit resolvent polynomials to obtain complexity
results for varying n?
  The results that we have treated so far are more algebraic than arithmetic in
nature, the only exception being what we said about Problem 3.4. It should be
                    ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            15

possible to formulate and prove similar results for other sufficiently explicitly given
fields over which polynomials in one variable can be factored efficiently. We now
turn to techniques that do exploit the arithmetic of the field. The natural way to
do this is to first consider the case of finite and local base fields.
    Let E be a finite field, f ∈ E[X] a nonzero polynomial, and n its degree. As we
mentioned in 2.8, there is a good algorithm that, given E and f , determines the
factorization type of f in E[X]. This immediately gives rise to the Galois group G,
which is cyclic of order equal to the least common multiple of the degrees of the
irreducible factors of f . One also obtains the cycle pattern of a permutation that
generates G as a permutation group. Note that already in the case of finite fields
the order of G may, for reducible f , be so large that the elements of G cannot be
listed one by one in polynomial time.
    We next discuss local fields.
Problem 3.9. Given a local field F and a polynomial f ∈ F [X] with a nonzero
discriminant, determine the Galois group G of f over F . What is the complexity
of this problem? Is there a good algorithm for it?
   I am not aware of any published work that has been done on Problem 3.9,
and I will only make a few brief remarks, restricting myself to the case that F
is non-archimedean. Once a satisfactory theory of factoring polynomials has been
developed (see 2.11), one can prove an analogue of Theorem 3.2. This does not yet
solve the problem, since even when f is irreducible the Galois group may have a
very large order. Tamely ramified extensions are small, however, which suggests
that the following problem should be doable.
Problem 3.10. Given F and f as in Problem 3.9, with F non-archimedean, decide
whether a splitting field of f over F is tamely ramified, and if so determine its Galois
group over F . Can this be done in polynomial time?
   When this problem is solved, one is left with wildly ramified extensions, which
occur only if p is small. In that case, one may first want to consider the following
problem, which looks harder than Problem 3.10.
Problem 3.11. Given F and f as in Problem 3.9, with F non-archimedean, de-
termine the Galois group of the maximal tamely ramified subextension M of a
splitting field of f over F . Can this be done in polynomial time?
    If f is irreducible of degree n, then the field M in Problem 3.11 has degree at
most n4 over F . This follows from a group-theoretic argument that was shown to
me by I. M. Isaacs.
    Even when all local problems are completely solved it is not clear whether they
are very helpful in solving Problem 3.1. There is a well-known heuristic technique
that can be used to obtain information about the Galois group, which comes down to
first considering the local Galois group at primes that do not divide the discriminant
of f (see [73, §1]). Not much can be proved about this method, however (cf. [34,
§4]). G. Cornell has suggested to look instead at the ramifying primes, the rationale
being that Problem 3.1 should be reducible to the case K = Q, in which case the
Galois group is generated by the inertia groups.

                               4. Rings of integers
  In this section we consider the following problem and its complexity.
16                                H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


Problem 4.1. Given an algebraic number field K, determine its ring of integers
O.
   Constructing an order in K as in 2.10 we see that this problem is equivalent to
the following one.
Problem 4.2. Given an order A in a number field K, determine the ring of integers
O of K.
   Much of the literature on this problem assumes that the given order is an equa-
tion order Z[α], and it is true that equation orders offer a few advantages in the
initial stages of several algorithms. It may be that in many practical circum-
stances one never gets beyond these initial stages (cf. [8, Preface]), but in the worst
case—which is what we are concerned with when we estimate the complexity of a
problem—these advantages quickly disappear as the algorithm proceeds. For this
reason we make no special assumptions about A except that it is an order.
   Most of what we have to say about Problem 4.2 also applies to the following
more general problem.
Problem 4.3. Given a commutative ring A of which the additive group is isomor-
phic to Zn for some n, and that has a nonvanishing discriminant over Z, determine
the maximal order in A ⊗Z Q.
  It is not difficult to show that Problems 4.2 and 4.3 are equivalent under deter-
ministic polynomial time reductions.
  The main result on Problem 4.1, which is due to Chistov [22, 14], is a negative
one.
Theorem 4.4. Under deterministic polynomial time reductions, Problem 4.1 is
equivalent to the problem of finding the largest square factor of a given positive
integer.
   The problem of finding the largest square factor of a given positive integer
                                                                             √      m is
easily reduced to Problem 4.1 by considering the number field K = Q( m). For
the opposite reduction, which in computer science language is a “Turing” reduction,
we refer to the discussion following Theorem 4.6 below.
   Since there is no known algorithm for finding the largest square factor of a given
integer m that is significantly faster than factoring m (see [43, §2]), Theorem 4.4
shows that Problem 4.1 is currently intractable. More seriously, even if someone
gives us O, we are not able to recognize it in polynomial time, even if probabilistic
algorithms are allowed. Deciding whether the given order A in Problem 4.2 equals
O is currently an infeasible problem, just as deciding whether a given positive
integer is squarefree is infeasible. This is not just true in theory, it is also true in
practice.
   One possible conclusion is that O is not an object that one should want to work
with in algorithms. It may very well be that whenever O is needed one can just
as well work with an order A in K, and assume that A equals O until evidence to
the contrary is obtained. This may happen, for example, when a certain nonzero
ideal of A is found not to be invertible; in that case one can, in polynomial time,
construct an order A′ in K that strictly contains A and proceed with A′ instead of
A.
   If it indeed turns out to be wise to avoid working with O, then it is desirable that
more attention be given to general orders, both algorithmically and theoretically
                    ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            17

(cf. [59]). This is precisely what has happened in the case of quadratic fields (cf.
[45, 49, 28]).
    The order A equals O if and only if all of its nonzero prime ideals p are nonsin-
gular; here we call p nonsingular if the local ring Ap is a discrete valuation ring,
which is equivalent to dimA/p p/p2 = 1. One may wonder, if it is intractable to find
O, can one at least find an order in K containing A of which the singularities are
bounded in some manner? One result of this sort is given below in Theorem 4.7;
it implies that given A, one can find an order B in K containing A such that all
singularities p of B are plane singularities, i.e., satisfy dimB/p p/p2 = 2.
    The geometric terminology just used should remind us of a situation in which
there does exist a good method for finding the largest square factor, namely, if
we are dealing with polynomials in one variable over a field. Thus, Theorem 4.4
suggests that, for a finite field E, finding the integral closure of the polynomial ring
E[t] in a given finite extension of E(t) is a tractable problem, and results of this
nature have indeed been obtained (see [22]). In geometric language, this means
that it is feasible to resolve the singularities of a given irreducible algebraic curve
over a given finite field. The corresponding problem over fields of characteristic zero
has been considered as well (see [71]), and one may wonder whether the geometric
techniques that have been proposed can also be used in the context of Problem
4.2. In any case, we can formulate Problem 4.2 geometrically by asking for the
resolution of the singularities of a given irreducible arithmetic curve.
    For many purposes, resolving singularities is a local problem, but as we see from
Theorem 4.4 that is not quite the case in the context of algorithms. It may be that
one only needs to look locally at those prime ideals p of A for which dimA/p p/p2 > 1,
but how does one find those prime ideals? And likewise, if A ∼      = Z[X]/f Z[X] is an
equation order, then, as all textbooks point out, one only needs to look locally at
those prime numbers p for which p2 divides the discriminant of f , but how does one
find those prime numbers? By contrast, once one knows at which p or p to look,
the problem does admit a solution. To formulate it we introduce some notation.
    Let A be an order in a number field K of degree n. Let further C be a subring
of A; for us, the most interesting cases are C = A and C = Z. For any nonzero
prime ideal p of C we define

                   A(p) = {β ∈ O: pm β ⊂ A for some m ∈ Z≥0 };

this is the “p-primary part” of O when viewed modulo A. It is not difficult to show
that A(p) is an order in K and that it is the smallest order in K containing A with
the property that all its prime
                              Lideals containing p are nonsingular. In addition, one
has an isomorphism O/A ∼    = p A(p) /A of C-modules, with p ranging over the set
of nonzero prime ideals of C, and A(p) = A for all but finitely many p. Thus, to
determine O, it suffices to determine all A(p) . For a single p, we have the following
result.
Theorem 4.5. There is a good algorithm that given K, A, C, p as above, deter-
mines A(p) .
   This is proved by analyzing an algorithm of Zassenhaus [77, 78]. We briefly
sketch the main idea. Let us first consider the case C = Z. Denote by p the prime
number for which p = pZ, and write A(p) = A(p) .
18                                H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


  One needs a criterion for A to be equal to A(p) . The multiplier ring Ra of a
nonzero A-ideal a is defined by

                               Ra = {β ∈ K: βa ⊂ a};

this is an order in K containing A. By q we shall denote a typical prime ideal of A
that contains p, and we let r be the product of all such q. By standard commutative
algebra, A equals A(p) if and only if all q are invertible, and q is invertible if and
only if Rq = A. Also, each Rq is contained in Rr , so that we can decide whether
or not A equals A(p) by looking at Rr . More precisely, if Rr = A then A = A(p) ,
and if Rr properly contains A then so does A(p) , since clearly Rr ⊂ A(p) .
   I claim that to turn the above considerations into an algorithm it suffices to have
a way of determining r. Namely, suppose that r is known. Then one can determine
Rr by doing linear algebra over Fp , using that pRr /pA is the kernel of the Fp -linear
map A/pA → End(r/pr) that sends each x ∈ A/pA to the multiplication-by-x map.
If this map is found to be injective, then Rr = A, and the algorithm terminates
with A(p) = A. If it is not injective, then Rr strictly contains A. In that case one
replaces A by Rr and starts all over again. Note that the number of iterations is
bounded by (log |∆A |)/(2 log p), where ∆A denotes the discriminant of A.
   It remains to find an algorithm for determining r. Since the ideals q are pairwise
coprime, r is their intersection, so r/pA is the set of nilpotents of the finite ring
A/pA. It can, again by linear algebra, be found as the kernel of the Fp -linear map
                                                 t
A/pA → A/pA that sends each x ∈ A/pA to xp ; here t is the least positive integer
for which pt ≥ n.
   This concludes the sketch of the algorithm underlying Theorem 4.5 for C = Z.
For general C, one can either modify the above, or first determine A(p) for p =
char C/p and then find A(p) inside A(p) .
   The above algorithm gives, with a few modifications, also something if p is not
supposed to be prime. This is expressed in the following theorem, which is taken
from [14].
Theorem 4.6. There is a good algorithm that given K and A as above, as well as
an integer q > 1, determines an order B in K that contains A(p) for each prime
number p that divides q exactly once.
   To prove this, one first observes that it suffices to exhibit a good algorithm
that given K, A and q either finds B as in the statement of the theorem, or finds
a nontrivial factorization q = q1 q2 . Namely, in the latter case one can proceed
recursively with q1 and q2 to find orders B1 , B2 , and one lets B be the ring generated
by B1 and B2 .
    To find B or q1 , q2 , one applies the algorithm outlined above, with a few changes.
The first change is that one starts by checking that q is not divisible by any prime
number p ≤ n; if it is, then either one finds a nontrivial splitting of q, or q is a
small prime number and one can apply the earlier algorithm. So let it now be
assumed that q has no prime factors p ≤ n, and that q > 1. The second change
is that one replaces, in the above algorithm, p and Fp everywhere by q and Z/qZ.
This affects the linear algebra routines, which are only designed to work for vector
spaces over fields. However, as we indicated in 2.4, they work just as well for
modules over a ring Z/qZ, until some division in Z/qZ fails, in which case one
obtains a nontrivial factor q1 of q. The third change is that r/qZ should now be
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                          19

calculated as the “radical of the trace form,” i.e., as the kernel of the Z/qZ-linear
map A/qA → Hom(A/qA, Z/qZ) that sends x to the map sending y to Tr(xy),
where Tr: A/qA → Z/qZ is the trace map. If q is a prime number exceeding n
then this is the same r as above.
   One can show that the modified algorithm has the desired properties, see [14].
This concludes our sketch of the proof of Theorem 4.6.
   Using Theorem 4.6 we can complete the proof of Theorem 4.4. Namely, suppose
that one has an algorithm that determines the largest square divisor of any given
positive integer. Calling this algorithm a few times, one can determine the largest
squarefree number q for which q 2 divides the discriminant of A. Applying the
algorithm of Theorem 4.6 to q one obtains an order B that contains A(p) for each
prime p for which p2 divides the discriminant of A, so that B = O.
   We now formulate a result that also gives information about the local structure
of B at primes p for which p2 divides q. Let A be an order in a number field K,
and let q be a positive integer. We call A nonsingular at q if each prime ideal
of A containing q is nonsingular. We call A tame at q if for each prime ideal p
of A containing q there exist an unramified extension R of the ring Zp of p-adic
integers, where p = char A/p, a positive integer e that is not divisible by p, and a
unit u ∈ R∗ , such that there is an isomorphism

                         lim
                          ←
                             A/pm ∼
                                  = R[X]/(X e − uq)R[X]
                         m

of Zp -algebras. As a partial justification of the terminology, we remark that for
prime q the order A is tame at q if and only if each prime ideal p of A containing q
is nonsingular and tamely ramified over q; this follows from a well-known structure
theorem for tamely ramified extensions of Zq (see [75, §3-4]). If A is tame at q
and p is a prime ideal of A containing q, then p is nonsingular if and only if either
p = char A/p divides q exactly once or the number e above equals 1, and otherwise
p is a plane singularity.
Theorem 4.7. There is a good algorithm that, given an order A in a number field
K of degree n, finds an order B in K containing A and a sequence of pairwise
coprime divisors qi , 1 ≤ i ≤ t, of the discriminant of B, such that
                           Qt
     (i) B is tame at q = i=1 qi ;
    (ii) all prime numbers dividing q exceed n;
   (iii) B is nonsingular at all prime numbers p that do not divide q.
   This follows from a closer analysis of the algorithm of Theorem 4.6. Using this
theorem and the properties of tameness, one can deduce the following result, which
expresses that one can approximate O as closely as can be expected on the basis of
Theorem 4.4.
Theorem 4.8. There is a good algorithm that, given an order A in a number
field K, finds an order B in K containing A and a positive integer q dividing the
discriminant of B such that B = O if and only if q is squarefree, and such that the
primes dividing [O : B] are exactly those that appear at least twice in q. Moreover,
there is a good algorithm that given this B and a nontrivial square dividing q finds
an order in K that strictly contains B.
  Next we discuss an algorithm that does a little more than the algorithm of
Theorem 4.5. Namely, in addition to finding A(p) , it also finds all prime ideals
20                               H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


of A(p) containing p. It depends—not surprisingly, if one considers the case of an
equation order Z[α]—on an algorithm for factoring polynomials in one variable over
a finite field, see 2.8. Due to this ingredient it is not a deterministic polynomial
time algorithm any more, and it has no extension as Theorem 4.6 that works for
nonprimes.
Theorem 4.9. There is a probabilistic algorithm that runsp in expected polynomial
time, and there is a deterministic algorithm that runs in char C/p times polyno-
mial time, that given K, A, C, p as in Theorem 4.5, determine
     (i) all prime ideals of A containing p;
    (ii) the order A(p) ;
   (iii) all prime ideals of A(p) containing p.

    One can do part (i) by analyzing the structure of the finite ring A/pA, as the
reader may check; below we give a different argument. Once one has (i), one can
do (ii) by Theorem 4.5 and (iii) by applying (i) to A(p) . We sketch an alternative
way to proceed, in which one constructs A(p) and the prime ideals simultaneously
without appealing to Theorem 4.5. Let it first be assumed that C = A.
    The algorithm works with a list of pairs B, q for which B is an order in K with
A ⊂ B ⊂ A(p) and q is a prime ideal of B containing p. Initially, there is only one
pair on the list, namely, A, p. The purpose of the algorithm is to achieve that q is
nonsingular as a prime ideal of B, for each pair B, q on the list. If that happens,
then A(p) is the sum of all B’s, and, as it turns out, the ideals qA(p) are pairwise
distinct and are precisely all prime ideals of A(p) containing p.
    The algorithm deals with a given pair B, q in the following manner. First one
determines, by means of linear algebra over the finite field B/q, an element γ ∈ K
with γ ∈  / B, γq ⊂ B; such an element exists, see [75, Lemma 4-4-3]. Next, one
considers γq. If γq 6⊂ q, then q is nonsingular, and the pair B, q is left alone.
Suppose now that γq ⊂ q. Then B[γ] is an order in K in which q is an ideal, and
using linear algebra one determines the minimal polynomial g of (γ mod q) over the
field B/q. This polynomial is factored into irreducible factors over B/q. For each
irreducible factor (h mod q) of g, one now adds the pair B[γ], q + h(γ)B[γ] to the
list, and one removes B, q.
    The above is repeated until all pairs are nonsingular.
    If C 6= A, then one replaces the pair C, p by A′ = C + pA, pA; note that pA
is a prime ideal of A′ with A′ /pA ∼= C/p. Applying the above with A′ in the role
                            ′(p)
of A one finds the order A       and all of its prime ideals containing p. One easily
shows that A(p) = A′(p) , and intersecting the prime ideals just mentioned with A
one finds (i). This concludes the sketch of the proof of Theorem 4.9.
    We note that the above algorithm also gives a convenient way of evaluating
the valuations corresponding to the prime ideals containing p. Namely, for each
nonsingular pair B, q the corresponding valuation v is given by

                         v(β) = max{m ∈ Z≥0 : γ m β ∈ B}

for β ∈ B, β 6= 0, where γ is as constructed in the algorithm. Since each element
of K can be written as a quotient of elements of B this allows us to compute v(β)
for each β ∈ K.
   It is well known that the p-adic valuations of a number field K = Q(α) corre-
spond bijectively to the irreducible factors of f over Qp , where f is the irreducible
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                          21

polynomial of α over Q. Thus Theorem 4.9 suggests that factoring polynomials in
one variable over Qp to a given precision can be done by a probabilistic algorithm
that runs in expected polynomial time and by a deterministic algorithm that runs
  √
in p times polynomial time. A result of this nature is given in [14]; see also [21],
where a more direct approach is taken.
   We close this section with a problem that is geometrically inspired.
Problem 4.10. If all singularities of A are plane singularities, can the algorithm
of Theorem 4.9 be arranged in such a way that the same applies to all rings B that
are encountered?
   It may be of interest to see whether the methods that have been proposed for
the resolution of plane curve singularities [11, 71] shed any light on this problem.
One may also wish to investigate the algorithm of Theorem 4.6 from the same
perspective.
   An affirmative answer to Problem 4.10 may improve the performance of the
algorithm. This is because the hypothesis on A is often satisfied, for example, if A
is an equation order or a “generalized” equation order as in 2.10; and finding γ in
the algorithm of Theorem 4.9 may become easier if q is at worst a plane singularity,
so that it can be generated by two elements.

                          5. Class groups and units
  In this section we discuss the following problem and its complexity.
Problem 5.1. Given an algebraic number field K, with ring of integers O, deter-
mine the unit group O∗ and the class group Cl O of O.
    First we make a few remarks on the statement of the problem. In the previous
section we saw that, given K, the ring O may be very hard to determine and that
consequently we may have to work with subrings A of O that, for all we know, may
be different from O. Thus, it would have been natural to formulate the problem
for any order A in K rather than just for O. We have not done so, for several
reasons. The first is that only very little work has been done for general orders in
fields of degree greater than 2. The second is that most difficulties appear already
in the case A = O and that some additional complications are avoided. Finally, it
is to be noted that all algorithms for calculating unit groups and class groups that
have been proposed are so time-consuming that the effort required in determining
O appears to be negligible in comparison; and it may very well be that the best
way of calculating the unit group and class group of a general order A proceeds by
first determining O, next calculating O∗ and Cl O, and finally going back to A.
    We shall denote by n and ∆ the degree and the discriminant of K over Q.
It will be assumed that O is given by means of a multiplication table of length
(2 + log |∆|)O(1) , as in 2.10. We shall bound the running times of the algorithms in
terms of |∆|.
    The next question to be discussed is how we wish O∗ and Cl O to be specified. As
an abstract group, we have O∗ ∼   = (Z/wZ) ⊕ Zr+s−1 , where w denotes the number
of roots of unity in K and r, s denote the number of real and complex archimedean
places of K, respectively. Determining O∗ means specifying the images of the
standard generators of (Z/wZ) ⊕ Zr+s−1 under an isomorphism to O∗ ; and we
also like to be provided with an algorithm that calculates the inverse isomorphism.
22                                     H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


Using the logarithms at the infinite places (see [37, Chapter V, §1]) and basis
reduction (see 2.6) one can prove that both these things can be achieved if we have
a set of generators for O∗ . However, just writing down a set of generators for O∗
may be very time-consuming. Suppose, for example, that K is real quadratic, i.e.,
n = 2 and ∆ > 0. Then O∗ is generated by −1 and a single unit ε of infinite order.
It is easy to see that the total number of digits of the coefficients of ε on the given
basis of O over Z equals R(log ∆)O(1) , where R denotes the regulator of K; see [37,
Chapter V, §1] for the definition of the regulator. It is reasonable to conjecture
that, for an infinite sequence of real quadratic fields, R is as large as ∆1/2+o(1) .
Hence we cannot expect to be able to write down ε, let alone calculate it, in time
significantly less than ∆1/2 . If we are interested in more efficient algorithms,  then
units must be represented in a different way, for example as a product γ k(γ) of
                                                                             Q
elements γ ∈ K ∗ with integer exponents k(γ) that may be very large in absolute
value. This leads to the question whether there exists a system of generating units
that one can express in this way using substantially fewer than |∆|1/2 bits. Also,
the following problem is suggested.
Problem 5.2. Given a number field K, finitelyQ       many elements γ ∈ K ∗ , and, for
each γ, an integer k(γ) ∈ Z, decide whether ε = γ γ k(γ) is a unit, i.e., belongs to
O∗ , and whether it equals 1. If it is a unit, then determine its residue class modulo
a given ideal and calculate, for a given embedding σ: K → C, the logarithm of σε
to a given precision.
   It may be expected that the first of these—recognizing units—can be done by
means of a good algorithm, even when O is not given, by means of factor refine-
ment (cf. [7]). Good results on the other problems can probably be obtained with
diophantine approximation techniques, such as basis reduction (see 2.6). The same
applies to the following more general problem.
Problem 5.3. Given a number field K and a finite set Γ of elements γ ∈ K ∗ , find
sets of generators for the subgroups
                           Y                                    Y             
         (k(γ))γ∈Γ ∈ ZΓ :         γ k(γ) = 1 ,    (k(γ))γ∈Γ ∈ ZΓ :   γ k(γ) ∈ O∗
                            γ∈Γ                                   γ∈Γ


of ZΓ and calculate the regulator of the group of all units of the form                k(γ)
                                                                           Q
                                                                               γ∈Γ γ      ,
k(γ) ∈ Z, to a given precision.
    Problems of this nature arise in several contexts: in an algorithm for factoring
integers [44, 17], in the discrete logarithm problem [27, 60], as we shall see below;
in the determination of unit groups and class groups.
    Returning to Problem 5.1, we still have to describe how we wish the class group
Cl O to be specified. It is a finite abelian group, so we may first of     Lall ask for
positive integers d1 , d2 , . . . , dt such that there is an isomorphism              ∼
                                                                             i Z/di Z =
Cl O of abelian groups, and secondly for idealsLa1 , a2 , . . . , at such that one such
isomorphism sends the standard generators of i Z/di Z to the ideal classes of the
ai . Once the class group has been calculated in this sense, it may remain very
difficult to find the inverse isomorphism: given an O-ideal, to which ideal of the
      Q m(i)
form i ai       is it equivalent? Even testing whether a given ideal is principal may
be very difficult.
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            23

    The order h = # Cl O of the class group is bounded by |∆|1/2 (n + log |∆|)n−1
(see Theorem 6.5). The example of imaginary quadratic fields—i.e., n = 2 and
∆ < 0—shows that h is often as large as |∆|1/2 (log |∆|)O(1) . Hence, if we are
willing to spend time at least of order |∆|1/2 then we could conceivably list all ideal
classes, and finding the inverse isomorphism might also become doable.
    The first thing to be discussed about Problem 5.1 is whether it can be done
at all, efficiently or not. This is a question that is strangely overlooked in most
textbooks, two notable exceptions being [9] and [19]. For the class group, one
often finds the theorem that every ideal class contains an integral ideal of norm at
most the Minkowski constant (n!/nn )(4/π)s |∆|1/2 , where s denotes the number of
complex places of K. However, this does not show that the class group is effectively
computable if no effective procedure for deciding equivalence of ideals is supplied.
    We shall prove a theorem from which the effective computability of O∗ and Cl O
is clear. We begin by introducing some notation. Let K be a number field of
degree n and discriminant ∆ over Q. A place p of K is an equivalence class of
nontrivial absolute values of K. The set of archimedean places of K is denoted by
S∞ . For p ∈  / S∞ , the norm Np of p is the cardinality of the residue class field at
p. For each place p, let | |p : K → R≥0 denote the unique absolute value belonging
to p with the property that |2|p = 2 if p is real; |2|p = 4 if p is complex; and
|K ∗ |p = (Np)Z if p Q is non-archimedean. The height H(x) of an element x ∈ K is
defined by H(x) = p max{1, |x|p }, the product extending over all places p of K.
For any set S of places of K with S∞ ⊂ S we let KS denote the group of S-units,
i.e., the subgroup of K ∗ consisting of those x ∈ K ∗ that satisfy |x|p = 1 for all
places p of K with p ∈   / S; in particular, we have KS∞ = O∗ if O denotes the ring
of integers of K.
Theorem 5.4. Let K be an algebraic number field, ∆ its discriminant over Q, and
s the number of complex places of K. Let d = (2/π)s |∆|1/2 , and S = S∞ ∪ {p: p
is a finite place of K with Np ≤ d}. Then the group KS is generated by the set of
those x ∈ KS for which H(x) ≤ d2 , and the ideal class group of the ring of integers
of K is generated by the ideal classes of the finite primes in S.
  The proof of this theorem is given in §6.
Remark. The example of real quadratic fields shows that it is not reasonable to
expect that the group KS∞ = O∗ is generated by elements x for which H(x) is
substantially smaller than ed . The group KS in Theorem 5.4 is generally much
larger than O∗ , but it is generated by elements that are much smaller.
   The relevance of Theorem 5.4 for the effective determination of O∗ and Cl O
comes from the exact sequence

                       0 → O∗ → KS → ZS−S∞ → Cl O → 0.

The middle arrow sends an element x ∈ KS to the vector (ordp x)p∈S−S∞ , where
ordp x is the number of factors p in x; so |x|p = Np− ordp x . The map ZS−S∞ → Cl O
sends (m(p))p to the ideal class of p pm(p) . The exactness at Cl O follows from
                                      Q
the last assertion of Theorem 5.4, the exactness at the other places is clear.
   To calculate O∗ and Cl O from the sequence, one starts by calculating the set
of generators of KS given by Theorem 5.4. It is well known that there are only
finitely many elements of bounded height in K (see [64, Chapter 2]), and from the
24                               H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


proof of this result it is clear that they can be effectively determined. Determining
the prime ideal factorizations of these generators one finds a matrix that describes
the map KS → ZS−S∞ . Applying algorithms for finitely generated abelian groups
(see 2.5) one obtains O∗ and Cl O as the kernel and cokernel of this map.
   We now turn to complexity results for Problem 5.1. Most results that have
been obtained concern quadratic fields (see [45, 61, 28]). For general number fields,
virtually all that is known can be found in [12] (note that, in that paper, R1/2 Dε
in Theorem 2 is a printing error for RDε , and D1/2+ε in Theorem 4 is a printing
error for R1/2 Dε ). The following theorem appears to be true.
Theorem 5.5. Given K and O, one can determine a set of generators of O∗
and the structure of Cl O in time at most (2 + log |∆|)O(n) |∆|3/4 by means of a
deterministic algorithm and in expected time at most (2 + log |∆|)O(n) |∆|1/2 by
means of a probabilistic algorithm.
   In [12] one finds a weaker version of this result, in which n is kept fixed. The
more precise result should follow by combining [12] with results that appear in [15].
   The algorithm underlying Theorem 5.5, for which we refer to [12] and the ref-
erences given there, is not the same as the method for effectively determining O∗
and Cl O that we just indicated. However, there does exist a connection between
the two methods. Namely, the proof of Theorem 5.4 depends on a lemma from
combinatorial group theory that constructs a set of generators of a subgroup H
of a group G from a set of generators of G itself (see Lemma 6.3), whereas the
algorithm of Theorem 5.5 constructs generators of the group O∗ by letting it act
on a certain graph; and it is well known that these two subjects are closely related
(see [63]). It would be of interest to understand this connection better, and to see
whether Theorem 5.5 can be deduced from a suitable version of Theorem 5.4.
   The higher exponent 3/4 in Theorem 5.5 in the case of a deterministic algorithm
is due to the use of algorithms for factoring polynomials over finite fields (see 2.8).
It suggests the following problem.
Problem 5.6. Can the exponent 3/4 in Theorem 5.5 be replaced by 1/2?
    For quadratic fields the answer is affirmative. It is likely that the method by
which this is shown, which is not completely obvious, carries over to general number
fields.
    We close this section with an imprecise description of a probabilistic technique
for the solution of Problem 5.1.
    Let the notation be as introduced before Theorem 5.4, and let S consist of the
archimedean primes of K and the non-archimedean primes of norm up to a certain
bound b. One supposes that one has a method of drawing elements of KS that are
“random” in a certain sense. For example, the method might consist of drawing
elements x of K whose coordinates on the given vector space basis of K over Q are
uniformly distributed over a certain set of rational numbers, such as the positive
integers up to a certain bound, and keeping only those x that are found to belong
to KS .
    To determine the class group and the units, one draws elements of KS until one
has the feeling that the subgroup H that they generate is equal to all of KS . One
may get this feeling if the number of elements that have been drawn is well over
#S, which is the minimal number of generators of KS as an abelian group, and if it
happened several times in succession that a newly drawn element of KS was found
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                            25

to belong to the subgroup generated by the elements drawn earlier; if Problem
5.3 has a satisfactory solution then this can be tested. Assuming that H = KS
one can determine O∗ and Cl O, as above, as the kernel and cokernel of the map
φ: H → ZS−S∞ that sends x to (ordp x)p∈S−S∞ .
   In general, one does not know that H = KS , so that ker φ and coker φ can only
be conjectured to be O∗ and Cl O, respectively. One does know that there is an
exact sequence
         0 → ker φ → O∗ → KS /H → coker φ → Cl O → (Cl O)/CS → 0,
where CS is the subgroup of Cl O generated by the ideal classes of the finite primes
in S. The sequence shows that H has finite index in KS if and only if the conjectured
class group coker φ is finite and the Z-rank of the conjectured unit group ker φ mod
torsion is the same as it is for the true unit group O∗ , namely #S∞ − 1. If H has
infinite index in KS one should of course continue drawing elements of KS .
   The information that one has about the relation between the conjectured class
group coker φ and the true class group Cl O is particularly meagre: one has a group
homomorphism coker φ → Cl O, but neither its injectivity nor its surjectivity is
known. It is surjective if and only if the ideal classes of the finite primes in S
generate the class group, and results of this nature are known only if the bound
b that defines S is at least |∆|1/2 times a constant depending on n. However, a
significant improvement is possible if one makes an unproved assumption. Namely,
Bach [6, Theorem 4] showed that if the generalized Riemann hypothesis holds,
then Cl O is generated by the ideal classes of the prime ideals of norm at most
12(log |∆|)2 . Hence if we assume the generalized Riemann hypothesis then the map
coker φ → Cl O is surjective for values of b that are much smaller than |∆|1/2 . If
the map is surjective, then the above exact sequence shows that
(5.7)                           h′ R′ = hR · [KS : H],
where h = # Cl O and R = reg O∗ are the true class number and regulator, and
h′ = # coker φ and R′ = reg ker φ the conjectured ones; here we assume that H
contains all roots of unity in K, which can easily be accomplished [56, §5.4]. Now
suppose that we are able to estimate hR up to a factor 2, i.e., that we can compute
a number a with a/2 < hR < a; if one assumes the generalized Riemann hypothesis
this can probably be done by means of a good algorithm, as in [16]. Then we see
from (5.7) that h′ R′ also satisfies a/2 < h′ R′ < a if and only if H = KS , and if and
only if one has both ker φ = O∗ and coker φ = Cl O.
   The above indicates that on the assumption of the generalized Riemann hypoth-
esis it may be possible to find a much faster probabilistic algorithm for determining
O∗ and Cl O than the algorithm of Theorem 5.5. This leads to the following prob-
lem
Problem 5.8. Assuming the truth of the generalized Riemann hypothesis, find a
probabilistic algorithm for Problem 5.1 that, for fixed n, runs in expected time
                        exp O((log |∆|)1/2 (log log |∆|)1/2 ) ,
                                                             

the O-constant depending on n.
   Of course, one also wants to know how the running time depends on n, and which
value can be taken for the O-constant. For imaginary quadratic fields Problem 5.8
has been solved [28]. For a partial solution in the general case, see [13].
26                                H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


                                6. Explicit bounds
   In the present section we prove a few explicit bounds on units and class numbers
of algebraic number fields, including Theorem 5.4. Several proofs in this section are
most naturally formulated in terms of ideles, as in [20, Chapter II]. To stress the
elementary character of the arguments I have chosen to use more classical language.
   We denote by K an algebraic number field of degree n and discriminant ∆ over
Q, and by r and s the number of real and complex places of K, respectively. We
embed K in KR = K ⊗Q R, which, as an R-algebra, is isomorphic to Rr × Cs . We
choose such an isomorphism, so that each element a ∈ KR has r + s coordinates ai ,
of which the first r are real and the last s complex. We put ni = 1 for 1 Q
                                                                          ≤ i ≤ r and
                                                                            r+s
ni = 2 for r +1 ≤ i ≤ r +s. The norm N : KR → R is defined by N a = i=1         |ai |ni .
                                          2
   Identifying each copy of C with R by mapping x + yi to (x + y, x − y) we
obtain an identification of KR with the n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn . It is
well known that this identification makes the ring of integers O of K into a lattice
of determinant |∆|1/2 in KR , and more generally every fractional O-ideal a into a
lattice of determinant Na · |∆|1/2 , where N denotes the ideal norm. We shall write

                                   d = (2/π)s |∆|1/2 .
    Let S be a set of places of K with S∞ ⊂ S. By IS we denote the group of
fractional O-ideals generated by the finite primes in S, and by KS , as in §5, the
group {a ∈ K ∗ : Oa ∈ IS }. Denote by iS : KS → KR   ∗
                                                       ×IS the embedding defined by
                           ∗
iS a = (a, Oa). We give KR ×IS the product topology, where IS is discrete. For any
                     ∗
compact set B ⊂ KR     × IS the set B ∩ iS KS consists of elements of bounded height
and is therefore finite. Hence iS KS is discrete. Also, iS KS is clearly contained in
                        ∗
the subgroup VS of KR     × IS consisting of those pairs (a, a) for which N a = Na.
Theorem 6.1. Let K be an algebraic number field, and let S be a set of places of
K containing S∞ and containing all finite places p with Np ≤ d, with d as above.
Let VS be as above, and denote by FS the set of all elements (b, b) ∈ VS for which
b ⊂ O, Nb ≤ d, and |bi | ≤ d1/n for 1 ≤ i ≤ r + s. Then FS is a compact subset of
VS and VS = FS · iS KS .
Proof. The compactness of FS follows easily from the definition of FS and the
fact that VS is closed in KR × IS . To prove the last assertion, let (a, a) ∈ VS .
Then a · a−1 is a lattice of determinant N a · |∆|1/2 · Na−1 = |∆|1/2 in KR . By
Minkowski’s lattice point theorem there exists a nonzero element b ∈ aa−1 with all
|bi | ≤ d1/n . From Ob ⊂ aa−1 it follows that Ob = aa−1 b for some integral O-ideal
b. Comparing determinants we see that N b = Nb, so Nb ≤ d. This implies that
b ∈ IS , so we have (b, b) ∈ FS . If we write b = ac then c is a nonzero element of
a−1 , so c ∈ K ∗ . Since we also have Oc = a−1 b ∈ IS , we even have c ∈ KS , so
(a, a) = (b, b) · iS c−1 . This proves Theorem 6.1.
     It follows from Theorem 6.1 that VS /iS KS is compact, if S is as in the theorem.
This allows one to deduce the Dirichlet unit theorem and the finiteness of the class
number. Namely, take for S the set of all places of K. From the exact sequence
0 → VS∞ → VS → IS → 0 one obtains an exact sequence
                     0 → VS∞ /iS∞ O∗ → VS /iS KS → Cl O → 0,
where O∗ and Cl O are as in §5. The map to Cl O is continuous if the latter is given
the discrete topology. Thus the compactness of VS /iS KS implies that VS∞ /iS∞ O∗
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                          27

is compact, which is essentially a restatement of the Dirichlet unit theorem, and
that Cl O is finite. In the same way one proves that VS /iS KS is compact for every
set S of primes containing S∞ , not just for those from Theorem 6.1.
   From the exact sequence and Theorem 6.1 we see that every element of Cl O
is the ideal class of an integral ideal b of norm at most d. This implies the last
assertion of Theorem 5.4. It also follows that d ≥ 1. The other assertion of Theorem
5.4 is a special case of the following theorem, in which the height H is as defined
in §5:
                                              r+s
                                              Y
                      H(a) = N(O + Oa)−1 ·        max{1, |ai |}ni .
                                             i=1
Theorem 6.2. Let K, S be as in Theorem 6.1, with S finite. Write mS =
max{Np: p ∈ S − S∞ } if S 6= S∞ and mS = 1 if S = S∞ . Then the group
KS is generated by the set of those a ∈ KS satisfying H(a) ≤ dmS and also by the
set of those a ∈ O ∩ KS satisfying H(a) ≤ d2 mS .
   For the proof we need a lemma from combinatorial group theory, as well as a
topological analogue.
Lemma 6.3. Let G be a group, P a set of generators for G, and H a subgroup
of G. Let F be a subset of G such that G = F H. Then H is generated by its
intersection with F −1 P F = {x−1 yz: x, z ∈ F, y ∈ P }.
Proof. Replacing P by P ∪ P −1 we may assume that P = P −1 , and replacing F by
a subset we may assume that the multiplication map F × H → G is bijective. Let
J ⊂ H be the subgroup generated by H ∩ F −1 P F . If y ∈ P , z ∈ F , then yz = xh
for some x ∈ F , h ∈ H, and then h = x−1 yz ∈ H ∩ F −1 P F ⊂ J. This proves
that P F ⊂ F J, so P F J ⊂ F J. Hence the nonempty set F J is stable under left
multiplication by P , which by our assumptions on P implies that F J = G. From
J ⊂ H and the bijectivity of F × H → G we now obtain J = H. This proves
Lemma 6.3.
Lemma 6.4. Let G be a Hausdorff topological group, and denote by G1 the con-
nected component of the unit element 1 of G. Let P ⊂ G be a subset containing 1
such that G is generated by P ∪ G1 . Let H ⊂ G be a discrete subgroup, and let F be
a compact subset of G such that G = F H. Then H is generated by its intersection
with F −1 P F .
Proof. The set H ∩ F −1 F lies in the discrete subgroup H, so (G − H) ∪ (H ∩ F −1 F )
is open, and it contains the compact set F −1 F . Hence it contains F −1 U F for
some open neighborhood U of 1. Intersecting with H we see that H ∩ F −1 F =
H ∩ F −1 U F . The subgroup of G generated by U is open, so it contains G1 .
Therefore G is generated by P ∪U . Applying Lemma 6.3 we find that H is generated
by
      H ∩ (F −1 (P ∪U )F ) = (H ∩ F −1 P F ) ∪ (H ∩ F −1 U F )
                           = (H ∩ F −1 P F ) ∪ (H ∩ F −1 F ) = (H ∩ F −1 P F ),
where in the last step we use that 1 ∈ P . This proves Lemma 6.4.
  To prove Theorem 6.2, we apply Lemma 6.4 to
                       G = VS ,     H = iS KS ,      F = FS ,
               P = {x ∈ VS : x2 = 1} ∪ {((Np)1/n , p): p ∈ S − S∞ },
28                                             H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


where FS is as in Theorem 6.1 and where (Np)1/n is viewed as an element of KR       ∗
                           ∗   ∗
via the natural inclusion R ⊂ KR . Using Theorem 6.1 one readily verifies that the
conditions of Lemma 6.4 are satisfied. Hence KS is generated by the set of those
elements a ∈ KS for which there exist (b, b), (c, c) ∈ FS , and (y, y) ∈ P such that

                                     (a, Oa) = (b, b)−1 · (y, y) · (c, c).

Then Oa = b−1 yc, so the denominator ideal den a of a divides b. For all i ∈
{1, 2, . . . , r + s} we have

                                                                   1/n
                     |bi | ≤ d1/n ,                    |yi | ≤ mS ,            |ci | ≤ d1/n ,

so for each subset J ⊂ {1, 2, . . . , r + s} we have

                         Y                                                        X
                                 |ci |ni ≤ dnJ /n                 where nJ =            ni ,
                         i∈J                                                      i∈J
                   Y                                     Y
                         |bi |−ni = Nb−1 ·                      |bi |ni ≤ Nb−1 · d1−nJ /n ,
                   i∈J                                   i∈J
                                                          /
                  Y                      Y
                                ni                     −ni
                        |ai |        =         |bi |         |ci |ni |yi |ni ≤ Nb−1 · d · mS .
                  i∈J                    i∈J


Choosing J = {i: |ai | > 1} we obtain
                                             Y
            H(a) = N(den a) ·                      |ai |ni ≤ Nb · Nbx−1 · d · mS = d · mS .
                                             i∈J


This proves the first assertion of Theorem 6.2. To prove the second assertion, we
use Minkowski’s lattice point theorem to choose a nonzero element b′ ∈ b with
|b′i | ≤ (d · Nb)1/n for all i. Then b′ b−1 is an integral ideal of norm at most d, so
b′ ∈ O ∩ KS . Also b′ a ∈ O ∩ KS , and we have
                                         Y
                     H(b′ ) =                  max{1, |b′i |}ni ≤ d · Nb ≤ d2 ,
                                         i
                                         Y                               Y
                           ′
                    H(b a) ≤                   max{1, |b′i |}ni ·            max{1, |ai |}ni
                                         i                               i
                                     ≤ d · Nb · Nb−1 · d · mS = d2 mS .

Since we can write a = (b′ a)/b′ , this proves the second assertion of Theorem 6.2.
Remark. Theorem 6.2 is also valid if the bound d2 mS is replaced by max{d2 mS ′ , dmS },
where S ′ = S∞ ∪ {p: Np ≤ d}. This is proved by applying Theorem 6.2 to S ′ and
choosing a nonzero element of height at most d · Np in each prime p ∈ S − S ′ .
   As a further application of Theorem 6.1, we deduce upper bounds for the class
number h = # Cl O and for the product hR of the class number and the regulator
R = reg O∗ . The upper bound for hR resembles the upper bound that Siegel [68]
proved using properties of the zeta function of K. For similar upper bounds, see
[58].
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                          29

Theorem 6.5. Let K be an algebraic number field of degree n and discriminant ∆
over Q, and let s denote the number of complex places of K. Let d = (2/π)s |∆|1/2 .
Then the class number h and the regulator R of K satisfy

                                 (n − 1 + log d)n−1
                         h≤d·                       ,
                                       (n − 1)!
                                 (log d)n−1−s · (n − 1 + log d)s
                        hR ≤ d ·                                 .
                                            (n − 1)!

Proof. We saw above that every ideal class contains an integral ideal of norm at
most d, so
                          h ≤ #{b ⊂ O: Nb ≤ d}.
For each positive integer m, the number of O-ideals
                                                 Q of norm m is at most the
number of vectors x = (xi )ni=1 ∈ Zn>0 satisfying i xi = m. One proves this by
considering how rational primes can split in K. Thus we obtain
                                          n         Y        o
                 #{b ⊂ O: Nb ≤ d} ≤ # x ∈ Zn>0 :       xi ≤ d .
                            Qn
Replacing each x by the box i=1 (xi − 1, xi ] we can estimate the right side by a
volume:
           n          Y        o     n             Y                 o
         # x ∈ Zn>0 :    xi ≤ d ≤ vol x ∈ Rn>0 :      max{1, xi } ≤ d .

Writing yi = log xi we see that the volume is equal to J(n, log d), where generally
for n ∈ Z>0 , δ ∈ R≥0 we put
                             Z                      X 
                   J(n, δ) =       P
                                                exp      yi dy.
                                y∈Rn ,   i max{0,yi }≤δ    i

This integral is found to be
                         n−1
                         X n − 1 δi
                                 
                    δ
         J(n, δ) = e ·
                        i=0
                              i    i!
                        n−1
                        X n − 1 (n − 1)n−1−i δ i        (n − 1 + δ)n−1
                 ≤ eδ ·                            = eδ ·                .
                        i=0
                              i       (n − 1)!               (n − 1)!

Putting δ = log d we obtain the inequality for h.
   For hR, we apply Theorem 6.1 with S equal to the set of all places of K. Let
u = #S∞ − 1 = n − 1 − s, and define the group homomorphism λ: VS → Ru × IS
by λ(a, a) = ((ni log |ai |)ui=1 , a). This is a surjective group homomorphism with a
compact kernel, so λiS KS is discrete in Ru × IS with a compact quotient. From the
definition of the regulator one derives that hR equals the volume of a fundamental
domain for λiS KS in Ru × IS . Hence Theorem 6.1 implies that hR ≤ vol λFS . For
each nonzero O-ideal b with Nb ≤ d we have, by an easy computation,
                                                                       u
                                             1/n              log(d/Nb)
               vol λ{(b, b) ∈ VS : |bi | ≤ d     for all i} =             .
                                                                   u!
30                                     H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


Therefore                                                  u
                                           X      log(d/Nb)
                                   hR ≤                       ,
                                                       u!
                                          Nb≤d

where the sum is over integral O-ideals b. Proceeding as with h one finds that this
is bounded above by
           Z                          X  δ − P max{0, y }u
                                                     i         i
                                   exp   yi ·                      dy,
                   P
             y∈Rn , i max{0,yi }≤δ     i
                                                       u!

with δ = log d. Using that s = n − 1 − u ≥ 0 one finds after some computation the
integral to be
              s                   s  
             X   s  δ u+i          X   s (n − 1)s−i δ u+i        δ u · (n − 1 + δ)s
      eδ ·                  ≤ eδ ·                        = eδ ·                    .
             i=0
                 i (u + i)!        i=0
                                       i    (n − 1)!                   (n − 1)!

This proves Theorem 6.5.
Remark. The upper bound for h in Theorem 6.5 is also valid when d, at both
occurrences, is replaced by the Minkowski constant d′ = (n!/nn )(4/π)s |∆|1/2 of K,
since every ideal class contains an integral ideal of norm at most d′ .

                                      Acknowledgments
   The author gratefully acknowledges the hospitality and support of the Institute
for Advanced Study (Princeton). I also thank Enrico Bombieri, Johannes Buch-
mann, Joe Buhler, Gary Cornell, Pierre Deligne, Bas Edixhoven, Boas Erez, David
Ford, Marty Isaacs, Ravi Kannan, Bill Kantor, Susan Landau, Andries Lenstra,
Arjen Lenstra, Kevin McCurley, John McKay, Andrew Odlyzko, Michael Pohst,
Carl Pomerance, and Jeff Shallit for their assistance and helpful advice.

                                          References
      1. L. M. Adleman and M. A. Huang, Recognizing primes in random polynomialtime, Research
         report, Dept. of Computer Science, Univ. of Southern California, 1988; Lecture Notes
         in Math., Springer, Heidelberg (to appear). Extended abstract: Proc. 19th Ann. ACM
         Sympos. on Theory of Computing (STOC), ACM, New York 1987, pp. 462–469.
      2. L. M. Adleman and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., Finding irreducible polynomials over finite fields,
         Proc. 18th Ann. ACM Sympos. on Theory of Computing (STOC), ACM, New York (1986,
         pp. 350–355.
      3. L. M. Adleman, C. Pomerance, and R. S. Rumely, On distinguishing prime numbers from
         composite numbers, Ann. of Math. (2) 117 (1983), 173–206.
      4. Archimedes, The sand-reckoner, in: Opera quae quidem extant, J. Hervagius, Basel, 1544.
         (Greek and Latin)
      5. A. O. L. Atkin and F. Morain, Elliptic curves and primality proving (to appear).
      6. E. Bach, Explicit bounds for primality testing and related problems, Math. Comp. 55
         (1990), 355–380.
      7. E. Bach and J. O. Shallit, Factor refinement, J. Algorithms (to appear).
      8. W. E. H. Berwick, Integral bases, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1927.
      9. Z. I. Borevič and I. R. Šafarevič, Teorija čisel, Izdat. “Nauka”, Moscow, 1964; English
         transl.: Number theory, Academic Press, New York, 1966.
     10. W. Bosma and M. P. M. van der Hulst, Primality proving with cyclotomy, Academisch
         proefschrift, Universiteit van Amsterdam, 1990.
     11. E. Brieskorn and H. Knörrer, Ebene algebraische Kurven, Birkhäuser, Basel, 1981.
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                                     31

12. J. Buchmann, Complexity of algorithms in algebraic number theory, Proceedings of the first
    conference of the Canadian Number Theory Association (R. A. Mollin, ed.), De Gruyter,
    Berlin, 1990, pp. 37–53.
13.          , A subexponential algorithm for the determination of class groups and regulators of
    algebraic number fields, Séminaire de Théorie des Nombres, Paris 1988–1989 (C. Goldstein,
    ed.), Birkhäuser, Boston, 1990, pp. 27–41.
14. J. Buchmann and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., Manuscript in preparation.
15. J. Buchmann and V. Shoup, Constructing nonresidues in finite fields and the extended
    Riemann hypothesis, in preparation. Extended abstract: Proc. 23rd Ann. ACM Sympos.
    on Theory of Computing (STOC), ACM, New York 1991, pp. 72–79.
16. J. Buchmann and H. C. Williams, On the computation of the class number of an algebraic
    number field, Math. Comp. 53 (1989), 679–688.
17. J. P. Buhler, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., and C. Pomerance, Factoring integers with the number
    field sieve, in preparation.
18. P. J. Cameron, Finite permutation groups and finite simple groups, Bull. London Math.
    Soc. 13 (1981), 1–22.
19. J. W. S. Cassels, Local fields, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1986.
20. J. W. S. Cassels and A. Fröhlich (eds.), Algebraic number theory, Proceedings of an in-
    structional conference, Academic Press, London, 1967.
21. A. L. Chistov, Efficient factorization of polynomials over local fields, Dokl. Akad. Nauk
    SSSR 293 (1987), 1073–1077; English transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl. 35 (1987), 430–433.
22.          , The complexity of constructing the ring of integers of a global field, Dokl. Akad.
    Nauk SSSR 306 (1989), 1063–1067; English transl.: Soviet Math. Dokl. 39 (1989), 597–
    600.
23. H. Cohen, A course in computational algebraic number theory, in preparation.
24. H. Cohen and A. K. Lenstra, Implementation of a new primality test, Math. Comp. 48
    (1987), 103–121.
25. H. Cohen and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., Primality testing and Jacobi sums, Math. Comp. 42
    (1984), 297–330.
26. D. J. Ford and J. McKay, Computation of Galois groups from polynomials over the ratio-
    nals, Computer Algebra (D. V. Chudnovsky and R. D. Jenks, eds.), Lecture Notes in Pure
    and Appl. Math., vol. 113, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1989, pp. 145–150.
27. D. Gordon, Discrete logarithms using the number field sieve (to appear).
28. J. L. Hafner and K. S. McCurley, A rigorous subexponential algorithm for computation of
    class groups, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 2 (1989), 837–850.
29.          , Asymptotically fast triangularization of matrices over rings, SIAM J. Comput.
    (to appear).
30. R. Kannan, Algorithmic geometry of numbers, Annual Review of Computer Sciences, vol.
    2 (J. F. Traub, B. J. Grosz, B. W. Lampson, N. J. Nilsson, eds.), Annual Reviews Inc.,
    Palo Alto, 1987, pp. 231–267.
31. W. M. Kantor, unpublished.
32. W. M. Kantor and E. M. Luks, Computing in quotient groups, Proc. 22nd Ann. ACM
    Sympos. on Theory of Computing (STOC), ACM, New York 1990, pp. 524–534.
33. D. E. Knuth, The art of computer programming, Vol. 2, Seminumerical Algorithms, Addison-
    Wesley, Reading, MA, second edition, 1981.
34. S. Landau, Polynomial time algorithms for Galois groups, Eurosam 84 (J. Fitch, ed.),
    Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 174, Springer, Berlin, 1984, pp. 225–236.
35.          , Factoring polynomials over algebraic number fields, SIAM J. Comput. 14 (1985),
    184–195.
36. S. Landau and G. L. Miller, Solvability by radicals is in polynomial time, J. Comput.
    System Sci. 30 (1985), 179–208.
37. S. Lang, Algebraic number theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1970.
38. A. K. Lenstra, Factorization of polynomials, Computational Methods in Number Theory
    (H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman, eds.), Math. Centre Tracts., vol. 154/155, Mathe-
    matisch Centrum Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 169–198.
39.          , Factoring polynomials over algebraic number fields, Computer Algebra (J. A. van
    Hulzen, ed.) Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 162, Springer, Berlin, 1983, pp. 245–254.
32                                       H. W. LENSTRA, JR.


     40.         , Factoring multivariate polynomials over algebraic number fields, SIAM J. Com-
         put. 16 (1987), 591–598.
     41. A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., Algorithms in number theory, Handbook of Theoret-
         ical Computer Science, Vol. A, Algorithms and Complexity (J. van Leeuwen, ed.), Elsevier,
         Amsterdam, 1990, pp. 673–715.
     42. A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., and L. Lovász, Factoring polynomials with rational
         coefficients, Math. Ann. 261 (1982), 515–534.
     43. A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., M. S. Manasse, and J. M. Pollard, The factorization of
         the ninth Fermat number (to appear).
     44.         , The number field sieve, in preparation. Extended abstract: Proc. 22nd Ann. ACM
         Sympos. on Theory of Computing (STOC), ACM, New York 1990, pp. 564–572.
     45. H. W. Lenstra, Jr., On the calculation of regulators and class numbers of quadratic fields,
         Journées Arithmétiques 1980 (J. Armitage, ed.), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.,
         vol. 56, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1982, pp. 123–150.
     46.         , Galois theory and primality testing, Orders and Their Applications (I. Reiner,
         K. Roggenkamp, eds.), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1142, Springer, Heidelberg, 1985,
         pp. 169–189.
     47.         , Algorithms for finite fields, Number Theory and Cryptography (J. H. Loxton,
         ed.), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 154, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
         1990, pp. 76–85.
     48.         , Finding isomorphisms between finite fields, Math. Comp. 56 (1991), 329–347.
     49. H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and C. Pomerance, A rigorous time bound for factoring integers, J.
         Amer. Math. Soc. (to appear).
     50. H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman (eds.), Computational methods in number theory,
         Mathematical Centre Tracts, vol. 154/155, Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam, 1982.
     51. R. Lovorn, Rigorous, subexponential algorithms for discrete logarithms over finite fields,
         thesis, University of Georgia, in preparation.
     52. A. McIver and P. M. Neumann, Enumerating finite groups, Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser.
         (2) 38 (1987), 473–488.
     53. A. M. Odlyzko, Discrete logarithms in finite fields and their cryptographic significance,
         Advances in Cryptology (T. Beth, N. Cot, and I. Ingemarsson, eds.), Lecture Notes in
         Comput. Sci., vol. 209, Springer, Berlin, 1985, pp. 224–314.
     54. P. P. Pálfy, A polynomial bound for the orders of primitive solvable groups, J. Algebra 77
         (1982), 127–137.
     55. M. E. Pohst, Three principal tasks of computational algebraic number theory, Number
         Theory and Applications (R. A. Mollin, ed.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1989, pp. 123–133.
     56. M. Pohst and H. Zassenhaus, Algorithmic algebraic number theory, Cambridge Univ. Press,
         Cambridge, 1989.
     57. C. Pomerance, Fast, rigorous factorization and discrete logarithm algorithms, Discrete
         Algorithms and Complexity (D. S. Johnson, T. Nishizeki, A. Nozaki, and H. S. Wilf, eds.),
         Academic Press, Orlando, 1987, pp. 119–143.
     58. R. Quême, Relations d’inégalités effectives en théorie algébrique des nombres, Sém. Théor.
         Nombres Bordeaux, 1987–1988, 19-01–19-19.
     59. J. W. Sands, Generalization of a theorem of Siegel, Acta Arith. 58 (1991), 47–57.
     60. O. Schirokauer, Discrete logarithms and local units, in preparation.
     61. R. J. Schoof, Quadratic fields and factorization, Computational Methods in Number The-
         ory (H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman, eds.), Math. Centre Tracts., vol. 154/155,
         Mathematisch Centrum Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 235–286.
     62.         , Elliptic curves over finite fields and the computation of square roots mod p, Math.
         Comp. 44 (1985), 483–494.
     63. J-P. Serre, Arbres, amalgames, SL2 , Astérisque 46 (1977).
     64.         , Lectures on the Mordell-Weil theorem, Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1989.
     65. D. Shanks, The infrastructure of a real quadratic field and its applications, Proceedings of
         the 1972 number theory conference, Univ. of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 1972, pp. 217–224.
     66. V. Shoup, New algorithms for finding irreducible polynomials over finite fields, Math.
         Comp. 54 (1990), 435–447.
     67.         , On the deterministic complexity of factoring polynomials over finite fields, Inform.
         Process. Lett. 33 (1990), 261–267.
                   ALGORITHMS IN ALGEBRAIC NUMBER THEORY                                      33

68. C. L. Siegel, Abschätzung von Einheiten, Nachr. Akad. Wiss. Göttingen Math.-Phys. Kl.
    1969, pp. 71–86; Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Band IV, Springer, Berlin, 1979, pp. 66–81.
69. R. P. Stauduhar, The determination of Galois groups, Math. Comp. 27 (1973), 981–996.
70. L. Szpiro, Présentation de la théorie d’Arakélov, Current Trends in Arithmetical Algebraic
    Geometry (K. A. Ribet, ed.), Contemp. Math., vol. 67, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
    1987, pp. 279–293.
71. J. Teitelbaum, The computational complexity of the resolution of plane curve singularities,
    Math. Comp. 54 (1990), 797–837.
72. N. Tzanakis and B. M. M. de Weger, How to solve explicitly a Thue-Mahler equation (to
    appear).
73. F. J. van der Linden, The computation of Galois groups, Computational Methods in Num-
    ber Theory (H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman, eds.), Math. Centre Tracts., vol. 154/155,
    Mathematisch Centrum Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 199–211.
74. P. van Emde Boas, Machine models, computational complexity and number theory, Com-
    putational Methods in Number Theory (H. W. Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman, eds.), Math.
    Centre Tracts., vol. 154/155, Mathematisch Centrum Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 7–42.
75. E. Weiss, Algebraic number theory, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963; reprinted, Chelsea, New
    York, 1976.
76. H. Zantema, Class numbers and units, Computational Methods in Number Theory (H. W.
    Lenstra, Jr. and R. Tijdeman, eds.), Math. Centre Tracts., vol. 154/155, Mathematisch
    Centrum Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 212–234.
77. H. Zassenhaus, Ein Algorithmus zur Berechnung einer Minimalbasis über gegebener Ord-
    nung, Funktionalanalysis, Approximationstheorie, numerische Mathematik, Oberwolfach
    1965 (L. Collatz, G. Meinardus, and H. Unger, eds.), Birkhäuser, Basel, 1967, pp. 90–103.
78. H. G. Zimmer, Computational problems, methods and results in algebraic number theory,
    Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 262, Springer, Berlin, 1972.

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720
