                                                          SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH
                                             A HEURISTIC FOR PRACTICAL INTEGER FACTORIZATION


                                                                               MARKUS HITTMEIR
arXiv:2301.10529v1 [math.NT] 25 Jan 2023




                                                    Abstract. The two currently fastest general-purpose integer factorization al-
                                                    gorithms are the Quadratic Sieve and the Number Field Sieve. Both tech-
                                                    niques are used to find so-called smooth values of certain polynomials, i.e.,
                                                    values that factor completely over a set of small primes. As the names of the
                                                    methods suggest, a sieving procedure is used for the task of quickly identify-
                                                    ing smooth values among the candidates in a certain range. In the present
                                                    paper, we present a novel approach based on representing such candidates as
                                                    sums that are always divisible by several of the primes in the factor base.
                                                    In a direct comparison with the Quadratic Sieve, the main advantage of our
                                                    method is that the resulting values are smaller, which increases the likelihood
                                                    of them being smooth. Using current implementations of the Self-initializing
                                                    Quadratic Sieve in two Python packages for number-theoretical computations
                                                    as benchmarks, a Python implementation of our approach runs faster in trials
                                                    with inputs of 30 to 70 decimal digits. We discuss several promising avenues
                                                    for further improvements and applications of the technique.




                                                                                1. Introduction
                                              Integer factorization is the task of computing the divisors of natural numbers.
                                           It is a problem with a long and fascinating history, and it is certainly among the
                                           most influential in algorithmic number theory. While there is a variety of algorithms
                                           significantly faster than the brute-force search for divisors, it is still an open problem
                                           to construct a technique that efficiently factors general numbers with hundreds to
                                           thousands of digits. The hardness of this problem is fundamental for the security
                                           of widely used cryptographical schemes, most prominently the RSA cryptosystem.
                                           Nevertheless, there is no proof for its hardness besides the fact that decades of
                                           efforts have failed to construct a more efficient technique.
                                              Quite regularly, there are set new records1 concerning the factorization of num-
                                           bers of certain size, mostly due to improved implementations of the best available
                                           algorithms and advances in the hardware and computing power. In addition, the
                                           bound for the deterministic integer factorization problem has been improved mul-
                                           tiple times in recent years ([11], [12], [10], [14]). On the other hand, there has
                                           only been little progress in the development of new techniques for practical integer
                                           factorization since the invention of the Number Field Sieve ([19]) in the 1990s. One
                                           of the earlier algorithms with sub-exponential runtime was by Dixon ([7]) in 1981.

                                              2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 11A51,11Y05.
                                              SBA Research (SBA-K1) is a COMET Centre within the framework of COMET – Competence
                                           Centers for Excellent Technologies Programme and funded by BMK, BMDW, and the federal state
                                           of Vienna. The COMET Programme is managed by FFG.
                                              1
                                                A recent record was the factorization of a 250 decimal digit number in February 2020 by
                                           Boudot et al., see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_Factoring_Challenge
                                                                                          1
2                                      M. HITTMEIR


From today’s perspective, it may be considered as a prototype for several other
algorithms. To this group belong the Continued Fraction factorization method
(CFRAC) described and implemented by Morrison and Brillhart ([24]) in 1975, the
Linear Sieve by Schroeppel and the Quadratic Sieve by Pomerance. The latter
author analyzed and compared these algorithms in 1982 in [25]. In general, there
is an extensive amount of literature on practical integer factorization algorithms.
The reader may find information on the mentioned methods and other factorization
techniques in the survey [18] and in the monographs [27] and [30]. These sources
also discuss a variety of factorization algorithms for numbers N that satisfy cer-
tain properties, or that have prime factors of certain shape. For example, Fermat’s
factorization method runs particularly fast if N has co-divisors that are very close,
while Pollard’s P-1 technique and the Elliptic Curve Method (ECM) work partic-
ularly well for numbers with small prime factors. In the present paper, we are
interested in so-called general-purpose factorization algorithms, which means that
the runtime complexity estimate of the procedure only depends on the size of the
input number N . Both the Quadratic Sieve and the Number Field Sieve belong
to this group. From a practical point of view, the Quadratic Sieve (and its mod-
ifications) is the best general-purpose factorization algorithm for N up to around
100 digits, while the Number Field Sieve is faster for inputs beyond that. While
methods such as CFRAC and ECM stay somewhat competitive up to a small input
length (see [23]), factorization tools usually use ECM to rule out the existence of
relatively small prime factors, but then switch either to the Number Field Sieve or
to the Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve (SIQS), which is the fastest modification of
the original Quadratic Sieve algorithm.2
    Our contribution is the presentation and evaluation of a novel approach that we
call Smooth Subsum Search (SSS). Just like CFRAC, the Linear Sieve and the Qua-
dratic Sieve, SSS belongs to the group of Dixon-type algorithms. In addition to a
detailed explanation of our algorithm and a discussion of its advantages and disad-
vantages compared to other techniques, we will discuss our current implementation
in Python and several experiments on the runtime complexity of SSS. Our results
demonstrate that SSS outperforms SIQS on semiprime3 numbers with 30 to 70
decimal digits. While these findings need to be corroborated in experiments with
different implementations of SIQS in other programming languages and in other
settings, they may indicate that SSS is the fastest available factorization algorithm
for general numbers in this range.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we discuss the
Quadratic Sieve and its modifications in greater detail, together with an important
subroutine of our own algorithm. Section 3 presents the main ideas of SSS. The
results of our experiments can be found in Section 4, where SSS is compared to
available implementations of the Quadratic Sieve in Python. Section 5 explores
three ideas on how to improve the current implementation of SSS, in particular
for numbers of larger size. Finally, we summarize and give concluding remarks in
Section 6.
   2In its standard settings, the tool Msieve (https://sourceforge.net/projects/msieve/) uses
ECM for searching for small prime factors with up to 15 digits. Similarly, for numbers with 31
digits or more, the calculator of Dario Alpern (https://www.alpertron.com.ar) switches to SIQS
after a quick search for small factors via ECM.
   3
     Throughout the paper, we will use this term for numbers composed of two distinct prime
factors. Under certain conditions, such numbers are the most difficult to factorize.
                               SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                      3


                                  2. Related Work
  Let N be the number we want to factorize. We will always assume that N is
odd, composite and not a perfect power of another number. The currently fastest
general-purpose factorization algorithm is the General Number Field Sieve with a
heuristic asymptotic runtime complexity of
                       p                                        
                  exp ( 3 64/9 + o(1))(log N )1/3 (log log N )2/3 .
For comparison, the heuristic asymptotic runtime complexity of the Quadratic Sieve
is exp (1 + o(1))(log N )1/2 (log log N )1/2 ([26]). The Number Field Sieve is signif-
icantly more complicated and harder to implement than the Quadratic Sieve. As
mentioned, the latter technique is also still faster in practice for factoring numbers
up to around 100 digits. We now restrict our attention to the technical details
of the Quadratic Sieve, as it is a suitable representative for the other Dixon-type
methods. In addition, it will be used as a benchmark for our own algorithm in the
experiments in Section 4.
   The ultimate goal of the Quadratic Sieve and the other Dixon-type algorithms
is to find two numbers X and Y such that X 2 ≡ Y 2 mod N . For such pairs, one
can easily show that there is a high chance that gcd(X − Y, N ) gives a nontrivial
divisor.
√           However, perfect squares are a rare occurrence. Since there are roughly
   N square numbers below N , simply picking random values for X and hoping for
X 2 (mod N ) to be square will take too long. So in order to find such X and Y ,
the first phase of all these algorithms tries to collect so-called smooth relations.
Such a relation is a congruence x2 ≡ y mod N such that the prime factorization
of y only consists of primes up to a certain bound B. In this case, the number y
is called B-smooth (or just smooth). Let p1 , . . . , pm be the primes up to B. The
set {p1 , . . . , pm } of these primes is referred to as factor base. The smooth relations
may then be written as x2 ≡ y = pe11 · · · pemm mod N for certain exponents ei ∈ N0 ,
i = 1, . . . , m. The first phase proceeds until enough of these relations are found,
which usually means a bit more than the number m of primes in the factor base.
As soon as this is the case, the second phase starts. Here, we want to find linear
dependencies in the exponent vectors (e1 , . . . , em ) of the smooth relations, i.e., a
subset of these vectors that sum to the 0-vector. We can use well-known methods
from linear algebra to identify such subsets and thereby find smooth relations that
can be multiplied to obtain a new congruence of the form
                                               m
                                                  e +e +···+ei,k
                                               Y
                           x21 x22 · · · x2k ≡   pi i,1 i,2      mod N,
                                    i=1
where ei,1 + ei,2 + · · · + ei,k ≡ 0 mod 2. As a consequence, there exists a number
                           Qm e +e +···+ei,k
Y such that Y 2 = i=1 pi i,1 i,2              . Clearly, there also exists X such that
X 2 = x21 x22 · · · x2k , and we have found what we where looking for. One important
parameter of these factorization techniques is the smoothness bound B. If B is
very large, then it is easier to find smooth relations. On the other hand, we need
to find much more of them for the second phase to work. In addition, the matrix
in the linear algebra step will be very large. If B is rather small, then we will most
likely not be able to find enough smooth relations.
   The main difference between Dixon’s method, CFRAC, the Quadratic Sieve and
our algorithm SSS is in how the smooth relations are collected in the first phase.
Dixon’s algorithm chooses random values x and checks if x2 (mod N ) is B-smooth.
4                                    M. HITTMEIR

                                                                         √
CFRAC uses the convergents in the continued fraction expansion of N . While
the value of x2 (mod N ) in Dixon’s method is bounded by N , the main advantage
                                                                       2
of CFRAC over √ Dixon is that it generates congruences of the form x ≡ y mod N
with |y| ≤ 2 N , which increases the chances for y being smooth. In√the basic
version of the Quadratic Sieve, the values of the polynomial f (x) = (x+d N e)2 −N
are used as candidates for possibly smooth y. Note that
                                          √          √
(2.1)               y = f (x) = x2 + 2xd N e + (d N e)2 − N,

which for small x gives a bound similar to the one obtained in CFRAC. The main
advantage of the Quadratic Sieve compared to CFRAC is in how we check the
smoothness of the candidates y. While CFRAC applies trial division or techniques
for smoothness detection of batches of numbers (see [1]), the Quadratic Sieve uses
sieving. The basic idea is as follows: Let again {p1 , . . . , pm } be the factor base F.
Our goal is to find arguments x such that f (x) is divisible by many primes in F.
We first remove all primes p from F for which Legendre’s symbol (N |p) = −1, since
N is a quadratic non-residue modulo such p and, thus, p cannot divide f (x) for
any value of x. Next, we use the well-known Tonelli-Shanks algorithm to compute
the solutions of f (x) ≡ 0 mod p for each remaining prime p in F. Note that
f (x + kp) ≡ f (x) mod p for every k ∈ Z. Hence, if f (x0 ) is divisible by p, so is
f (x0 + kp) for every k ∈ Z. We start the sieve by initializing an indexed array of
pre-defined length L containing zeros, where each index corresponds to an argument
x. For each p ∈ F and each x0 with f (x0 ) ≡ 0 mod p, we then raise the entries in
the array at the indices x0 + kp for k ∈ Z by dlog pe. At the end of the sieving, we
check the array for entries that are larger than a certain threshold, as for these it
follows that f (x) is divisible by a lot of primes in the factor base and thus likely to
be smooth. Since the information about the actual divisors of such f (x) is lost, we
still need to apply either trial division or some other factorization algorithm suitable
for finding small prime factors. However, the sieving procedure greatly reduces the
total number of such applications compared to what is needed in CFRAC.
   If we have not found enough smooth relations by applying the sieving procedure
above, we may continue by increasing the length L of the sieving array. However,
this will lead to the expression (2.1) getting quite large, which decreases the chances
of f (x) being smooth. The Multiple Polynomial Quadratic Sieve (MPQS) ([29]),
an improvement of the basic version of the quadratic sieve, concerns the use of
multiple polynomials fa,b (x) = (ax + b)2 − N with a, b ∈ Z. While switching to
another polynomial allows the use of a new array and thus solves the problem of
increasing values of the smoothness candidates, it is also somewhat expensive to
initialize new polynomials and compute the solutions of fa,b (x) ≡ 0 mod p for
all the primes p in the factor base. A remedy for this problem has been found
in another improvement, the already mentioned Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve
(SIQS) [3]. The idea is to choose a as a product of primes in the factor base,
and b such that b2 − N = ac for some c ∈ Z. Then fa,b (x) = a(ax2 + bx + c),
so fa,b (x) is smooth if and only if ax2 + bx + c is smooth. In addition, there are
several different possible choices b for each choice of a that may be computed via the
Chinese Remainder Theorem. The corresponding solutions to fa,b (x) ≡ 0 mod p
for each prime p are related in a way that allows to change to a new polynomial
much more easily. In particular, the expensive inversion of elements modulo the
primes p only needs to be done once for every choice of a.
                                 SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                        5


   One further improvement that may be applied to all Dixon-type algorithms is
the so-called large prime variant ([2]). If we have found a relation x2 ≡ y mod N
where y is partially smooth, meaning the part r of its factorization that is not
smooth is comparably small, then we may also save this so-called partial relation.
As soon as we find two partial relations of the form
                                    x21 ≡ y1 · r   mod N
                                    x22 ≡ y2 · r   mod N
where y1 and y2 are smooth, we may combine them to get a full relation, namely
(r−1 )2 x21 x22 ≡ y1 y2 mod N . This improvement can speed up the search for smooth
relations by about a factor of 2.
   Finally, let us briefly discuss the smoothness detection algorithm by Bernstein
that has already been mentioned in the context of CFRAC. For cases where siev-
ing the values of a polynomial in the described sense is not an option, Bernstein
describes another way to find smooth and partially smooth numbers in a given set.
As mentioned in the abstract, SSS is not based on sieving. In Section 3, we will
use the following procedure ([1, Algorithm 2.1]) instead. Let F = {p1 , . . . , pm } be
the factor base and C = {x1 , . . . , xn } be a set of positive integers.

smooth batch(F, C)
 1: Compute z = p1 · · · pm using a product tree.
 2: Compute z (mod p1 ), . . . , z (mod pm ) using a remainder tree.
                                                        e
 3: For k = 1, . . . , n, compute yk = (z (mod pk ))2
                                                    (mod xk ) using repeated squar-
                                                                 e
    ing. Here, e is the smallest nonnegative integer such that 22 ≥ xk .
 4: For k = 1, . . . , n, print xk / gcd(xk , yk ).


   The algorithm outputs the part of the factorization of each xk that is not smooth.
For more information on smooth detection as well as on product and remainder
trees, see [6, Section 3.3]. We now move on to the presentation of SSS.

                              3. Smooth Subsum Search
    Let us consider an integer polynomial f : Z → Z and a factor base F of primes
smaller than some bound B. The task is to find x ∈ Z such that f (x) is B-smooth.
In Section 2, we have discussed     √ the Quadratic Sieve for solving this problem for
the polynomial f (x) = (x + d N e)2 − N in order to factor the number N . The
algorithm presented in this section solves the same problem, but uses a heuristic
search approach instead of sieving.
    We start by discussing a suitable representation of the possible solutions x. We
will see that this representation already restricts our attention to values x with
increased likelihood of f (x) being smooth. We are looking for preferably small
values x such that f (x) is divisible by several (powers of) the primes in F. Let
p1 , p2 , . . . , pm be the odd primes in F, and assume that (N |pi ) = 1 for i = 1, . . . , m.
Then, the congruence f (x) ≡ 0 mod pi has two solutions Ni = {si,1 , si,2 }. Using
the Chinese Remainder Theorem, we may easily represent those x for which f (x)
is divisible by specific primes in F. Namely, with xi ∈ {0, 1, 2}, we represent the
candidates x via vectors
                                     x= b (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ).
6                                              M. HITTMEIR


If xi > 0, we fix the value of x (mod pi ) = si,xi ∈ Ni and thereby make sure that
f (x) ≡ 0 mod pi holds. If xi = 0, we leave the value of x (mod pi ) undefined, and
it will ultimately be determined by the other values in the vector that we did fix.
Of course we would like f (x) to be divisible by as many primes in F as possible.
However, if we run the Chinese Remainder Theorem on vectors (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm )
where most of the xi are nonzero, then the modulus M , i.e. the product of the
primes pi for which x (mod pi ) is fixed, will be very large, and so will be the
average values of the resulting x. The chances for f (x) actually being smooth are
then rather small. From this observation, it becomes quite clear that we would like
to keep the quantity |x|/M as small as possible in order to increase our chances for
finding smooth numbers. The approach we currently use is to focus on a subset S
of the smaller primes in F and, for generating a random solution, select only a few
primes in S for which the corresponding value xi is nonzero. We call S the small
factor base. Assume that there are n primes in S, i.e., let S = {p1 , . . . , pn }. Then
xi = 0 for i > n in all considered representations (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ), and we may
just denote them by (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ). Here is our function for retrieving the value
x that corresponds to the representations (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) by applying the Chinese
Remainder Theorem.

get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn )
                         Q
 1: Compute M =              i: xi 6=0 pi
 2: Return
                                          X M ci
                                 x :=            · si,xi     (mod M ),
                                             pi
                                   i: xi 6=0
     where ci = (M/pi )−1 (mod pi )

   Before discussing our implementation of SSS in greater detail, let us take a look
at a sketch of the complete procedure for reference throughout of the remainder of
this section.
    (1) Initialization
         We perform the following steps once before starting the main loop.
           (i) Compute the factor base F and small factor base S.
          (ii) Compute the roots of f modulo pi for the odd primes pi in S.
         (iii) Compute a product tree of F as preparation for smooth batch4 (see
               Section 2).
    (2) Main Loop
         We repeat the following steps until we have found enough smooth relations.
           (i) Choose k random primes in S and compute their product M . Compute
               several divisors of M and store them in a set M.
          (ii) For i = 1, . . . , n, choose xi ∈ {1, 2} if pi is among the k chosen
               primes, and set xi = 0 otherwise. Let x be the value returned by
               get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
         (iii) Compute the residues of x modulo the elements m in M, and store
               the values |f (x)|/m in a set C of candidates. To keep |f (x)| small, we
               use the residues in the range {−dm/2e, . . . , bm/2c}.
         (iv) Run smooth batch(F, C).
    4We modified the code from https://facthacks.cr.yp.to for our implementation.
                                  SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                            7


                     Table 1. Choice of factor base sizes m and n

                                     Digits     m        n
                                     ≤ 18       60       12
                                     19 ≤ 25    150      30
                                     26 ≤ 34    200      40
                                     35 ≤ 36    300      60
                                     37 ≤ 38    400      80
                                     39 ≤ 40    500      100
                                     41 ≤ 42    600      120
                                     43 ≤ 44    700      140
                                     45 ≤ 48    1000     200
                                     49 ≤ 52    1200     240
                                     53 ≤ 56    2000     400
                                     57 ≤ 60    4000     800
                                     61 ≤ 66    6000     1200
                                     67 ≤ 70    10000    2000
                                     ≥ 71       30000    6000

   The computation of the divisors of M in Step (2.i) is comparably expensive. For
this reason, we actually run the Steps (2.ii) to (2.iv) multiple times with different
choices for xi ∈ {1, 2} and, thus, different values of x. On can consider the Step
(2.i) as a global search and the Steps (2.ii) to (2.iv) as a local search routine. The
candidates we generate in the local search are, in some sense, subsums of the sum
modulo M returned in Step 2 of get x. In Section 5.1, we will actually discuss
a possible improvement of the method based on the subset-sum problem. In any
case, this is where the name of the method comes from.
3.1. Current implementation. Let us now discuss the details of our implemen-
tation5 and the used parameters. For the sizes m and n of the factor base F and
the small factor base S, we aim6 at the values given in Table 1. Here, m is chosen
similarly as for SIQS in various factorization tools. In particular, the choices for m
between 26 and 70 digits are taken from the source code of the primefac package in
Python, which uses similar parameters as Msieve v1.52 and is one of the implemen-
tations used in our experiments in Section 4. In order to find a good choice for n,
which is a new parameter in our algorithm, we conducted a number of experiments.
In the end, n = m/5 showed satisfying results.
   In addition to the Steps (1.ii) and (1.iii) in the sketch above, we conduct two
more precomputations to reduce the cost of the main loop.
    (1) We want to avoid the inversion in the coefficients ci = (M/pi )−1 (mod pi )
        used in Step 2 of the function get x. Let µ be the product of all primes in
        S and let γi := (µ/pi )−1 (mod pi ). Then it is easy to check that, for every
        M | µ and every i = 1, . . . , n, we have
                               µγi       M ci
                                      ≡         mod M.
                                pi        pi
   5Repository: https://github.com/sbaresearch/smoothsubsumsearch
   6Our implementation considers the first 2m primes for F and then removes those p with
(N |p) − 1 from the factor bases. Since N is a quadratic non-residue for about half of these primes,
this leads to slightly varying, but overall similar cardinalities as those given in Table 1.
8                                               M. HITTMEIR


          We hence precompute the global coefficients Λi := (µγi )/pi for i = 1, . . . , n
          once and may then use them in the main loop, even though the modulus
          M is constantly changing.
      (2) In Step (1.ii), we compute the roots {si,1 , si,2 } of f modulo the odd primes
          in the small factor base S. In addition, we also compute the differences
                                         ∆i := Λi · (si,2 − si,1 ).
         If we then want to switch from a solution x =              b (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , 1, xi+1 , . . . , xn )
         to the solution (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , 2, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) or vice versa, we may easily do
         that by computing (x + ∆i ) (mod M ) or (x − ∆i ) (mod M ), respectively.
Equipped with the quantities Λi and ∆i , we may now move on to the core of the
SSS algorithm, which is the search function. Let R and P be the sets in which we
save full and partial relations, respectively.

search(k, R, P)
    1: Choose k random indices in {1, . . . , n} and store them in a set I.
    2: Compute the product M of all primes pi ∈ S with i ∈ I.
    3: Compute all divisors of M with exactly k, k − 1, k − 2 and k − 3 prime factors.
      Store them in a set M.
    4: For i = 1, . . . , n, let xi = 1 if i ∈ I, and set xi = 0 otherwise.Compute
    x ← get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
 5: for i ∈ I do
 6:    x ← (x + ∆i ) (mod M )
 7:    Initialize C = ∅
 8:    for m ∈ M do
 9:        If pi | m, continue
10:        x̄ ← x (mod m)
11:        If 2x̄ < m, add |f (x̄)|/m to C. Otherwise, add |f (x̄ − m)|/m to C.
12:    Run smooth batch(F, C). Let g1 , . . . , g` be the returned values.
13:    for i = 1, . . . , ` do
14:        If gi = 1, add the corresponding x̄ to R.
15:        If 1 < gi < 128 · pm , add the corresponding x̄ to P.

   The parameter k in the search function and the size n of the small factor base
together have a direct impact on the average magnitude of the values x we are
dealing with. Similarly to our approach for choosing n, we have conducted a number
of experiments to derive a suitable choice for k. In the current implementation, we
are using k = 8. In Step 3, we then compute all divisors of M with 5, 6, 7 and
8 prime factors. It follows that M consists of 93 elements. In the application of
get x in Step 4, we use the precomputed values Λi . Here, we are starting with
the solution (x1 , . . . , xn ) that consists of 0’s and 1’s. In Step 6, we make sure
that we are considering a different value for x in each run of the for-loop to avoid
redundancies in the found smooth relations. By adding ∆i to the previously used
x, we basically exchange the corresponding 1 in the solution vector by a 2. Step 9
also removes redundancies in the computation, as the change applied to x in Step
6 does not affect the values of x (mod m) in the cases where pi divides m. For all
other elements in M, we then compute x (mod m) and, depending on whether |x̄|
or |x̄ − m| is smaller, evaluate |f | at this value, divide by m and add the result to C.
                              SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                    9


Finally, we apply smooth batch to C and check if the resulting non-smooth parts
of any of the candidates equals 1, in which case we have found a full relation, or is
smaller than 128 · pm , in which case we have found a partial relation (see Section 2).
We note that, after the random choice of indices in the global search in Step 1, the
local search and the remainder of the function are deterministic.
   We now simply repeat search(k, R, P) until we have found enough full and
partial relations. As soon as this is the case, we proceed to the linear algebra stage
of the algorithm, which is the same as for other Dixon-type algorithms. Besides the
already mentioned approaches for improvements in Section 5, there are also minor
tweaks and variations of the algorithm that make it run a bit faster. Let us discuss
two of them:
                                                          √
    (1) Using a different polynomial than f (x) = (x+d N e)2 −N . While SSS does
         not really gain anything by changing polynomials during the algorithm like
         in SIQS, the search seems to run faster for certain √ polynomials compared
         to others. In particular, consider fα (x) = (x + d αN e)2 − αN for small
         choices of α ∈ N. One approach for finding a good choice of α is the
         Knuth-Schroeppel function ([29, p.335]). However, we have not used this
         improvement in the experiments in Section 4.
    (2) Let η be the product of all primes in F, which is computed in the product
         tree during precomputations (see Step (1.iii) of the sketch). Before starting
         the main loop, we multiply η by powers of the primes in the factor base
         until each prime power dividing η is larger than 215 . This allows to reduce
         the exponent e in Step 3 of smooth batch. In fact, our implementation
         does not run Step 3 at all. We might miss a few smooth relations, but the
         runtime savings due to the omitted repeated squarings make up for that. In
         slightly different form, this improvement is already mentioned in Bernstein’s
         original paper on the smooth-batch algorithm. In fact, a long list of other
         ideas for speedups of the procedure can be found in [1, Section 3]. Since
         smooth batch appears to be the bottleneck of our implementation, we
         suspect that there is still room for improvement.

3.2. Comparison to SIQS. The described implementation of SSS can be consid-
ered as a brute-force search for solutions x modulo products of primes M such that
|x|/M is small. Considering the fact that all the solutions found by the algorithm
satisfy |x|  M/2 (due to Step 11 in search), we obtain
                                                                   √
                   2
                          √          √     2
                                                         √        2 N +1 M
   |f (x)|/M = |(x + 2xd N e + (d N e) − N )|/M  d N e +                  +
                                                                     M        4
as the worst-case upper bound for all smoothness candidates. We will see in Sec-
tion 4√that, in practice, most of the candidates are actually multiple factors smaller
than N . Considering again the bound (2.1) of the candidates in the Quadratic
Sieve, we observe that there the converse √ statement is true, and its candidates are
on average multiple factors larger than N depending on the size of the x we
are sieving for. Since a similar bound also holds for SIQS, the reduced candidate
size and the resulting increase in our chances to find smooth relations is the main
advantage of SSS over SIQS. Another advantage is that SSS is arguably simpler
than SIQS. The core functions of our approach discussed in this section can be
implemented in less than 100 lines of code.
10                                  M. HITTMEIR


   A disadvantage of SSS is that we are not able to use sieving in order to iden-
tify smooth candidates. Sieving (as described in Section 2) is much faster than
smooth batch, and SIQS can check more candidates in the same time. While
SSS and SIQS appear to have the same asymptotic runtime complexity, there are
differences in the hidden constants, which are affected by the mentioned facts, i.e.
     (1) that the candidates in SSS are smaller, and
     (2) that SIQS uses sieving.
The outcome of a practical comparison of these two algorithms basically depends
on which of the two benefits (1) and (2) is larger. The experiments in Section 4
show that, in the considered input range, (1) appears to outweigh (2).

3.3. SSSf: A filter for smoothness candidates. We have already mentioned
that the smooth-batch procedure appears is the bottleneck of SSS. This becomes
more noticeable on inputs N with about 55 digits or more. We now propose an
improvement that works like a filter for the candidates in C in Step 12 of search.
Before applying smooth batch with the complete factor base F, we apply it with
a subset of its smallest primes. To be more concrete, we split up F into two disjoint
subsets F1 and F2 . F1 contains the smallest primes in F such that ρ = |F|/|F1 | for
some preset proportion ρ, and F2 contains all remaining primes. We then replace
Step 12 in search by the following procedure.

smooth filter(F1 , F2 , C, δ)
 1: Initialize Cf = ∅
 2: Run smooth batch(F1 , C). Let g1 , . . . , g` be the returned values.
 3: for i = 1, . . . , ` do
 4:     If gi < 10d/2−δ for the number d of decimal digits of N , add gi to Cf .
 5: Run smooth batch(F2 , Cf ) and proceed with Step 13 of search.


   The main goal of smooth filter is to reduce the number of candidates that have
to be checked in the smooth-batch procedure for divisibility by the complete factor
base. In order to achieve that, we first apply smooth batch(F1 , C) to check for
divisibility by the smallest √
                             primes. If the resulting non-smooth part of a gi is not
significantly smaller than d N e in Step 4, we directly discard this candidate.
   We denote SSS applied with this modification by SSSf. While SSSf is in fact
slower than SSS for smaller inputs N with up to around 50 to 55 digits, the im-
provement is noticeable on inputs with 60, 65 or 70 digits. Besides the already
discussed parameters m, n and k, SSSf comes with two additional parameters ρ
and δ. We are currently using the values given in Table 2.

                       Table 2. Choices of ρ and δ in SSSf

                                   Digits   ρ    δ
                                   60       20   8
                                   65       22   9
                                   70       25   10
                                  SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                  11


                                      4. Experiments
   The approach described in Section 3 has been implemented in the program-
ming language Python, a freely available high-level language that emphasizes code
readability. The reader may therefore easily reproduce all experimental results
presented in this section. On the other hand, Python is considerably slower than
other programming languages (such as C), which restricted the size of the input
numbers N we could factorize in our experiments. We have thus focused on small
to medium-sized numbers in the range from 30 to 70 decimal digits. As already
mentioned in Section 2, the currently best general-purpose factorization algorithm
for integers in this range is the Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve (SIQS).
   In order to compare SSS to SIQS, we have used currently available implementa-
tions of SIQS in Python libraries. The first we found is a recent implementation in
sympy 7, a well-known library for symbolic mathematics. The second implementa-
tion we found is part of primefac 8, a package focused on primality tests and integer
factorization. It is noted in the documentation that their SIQS implementation is
taken mostly verbatim from another package, PyFactorise 9. While we have found
other implementations of the Quadratic Sieve in Python, these two appeared to
be most refined and competitive in our experiments. Throughout the section, we
will denote sympy’s implementation by sSIQS and the implementation by prime-
fac/PyFactorise by pSIQS. With regards to the comparability of the approaches,
we point out the following.
       • We have applied all three implementations with the same code for the sec-
         ond phase (the linear algebra stage10) to make sure that any runtime dif-
         ferences only result from the performance in the first phase, where smooth
         relations are collected. We utilized the Gaussian elimination algorithm over
         F2 as it is implemented in primefac. The approach is based on [17].
       • For all approaches, we used a factor base size m of F close to the values in
         Table 1. For the length L of the sieved intervals in the SIQS implementa-
         tions, we used the standard settings given in the source code of pSIQS.
       • Both sSIQS and pSIQS do not use the Knuth-Schroeppel function to find a
         suitable multiplier α for N . As already discussed at the end of Section 3.1,
         we also did not make use of this improvement.
       • In pSIQS, the large prime variant (see end of Section 2) is not implemented.
         This has to be kept in mind when considering the results, and is also the
         reason why we did not run pSIQS on inputs with 60 digits or more.
       • We used SSS with the bound 128 · pm for saving partial relations (see Step
         15 of search). The same bound is used in sSIQS.
Let us now discuss our experimental setup. We consider input numbers N with
d = 30, 35, 40, 45, . . . , 70 digits. For each of these input sizes, we did the following.
     (1) Generate a random semiprime N with d digits, such that its two prime
         factors are about the same size.
     (2) Apply sSIQS to factorize N . If d < 60, apply pSIQS to factorize N .
     (3) If d < 60, apply SSS to N . For d = 60, 65, 70, apply SSSf to N .

   7https://docs.sympy.org/latest/modules/ntheory.html
   8
    https://pypi.org/project/primefac/
   9
    https://github.com/skollmann/PyFactorise
   10In general, this stage contributes only a tiny fraction to the complete runtime.
12                                   M. HITTMEIR


Due to the increase in general time complexity, we consider 10 different inputs
N for d ∈ {30, 35, 40}, 5 different N for d ∈ {45, 50, 55} and 2 different N for
d ∈ {60, 65, 70}. After we have finished all runs for a certain d, we compute the
mean and the standard deviation of the runtimes of all applied methods. The
results11 can be found in Table 3, and the mean runtimes are visualized in Figure 1
in form of line plots.

            Table 3. Runtime complexity in seconds: Mean ± STD

            #Digits SSS/SSSf            sSIQS              pSIQS
            30        0.32±0.15         3.59±1.97          2.61±1.73
            35        0.98±0.36         5.41±1.75          9.37±4.80
            40        3.19±1.30         19.65±7.75         22.59±11.49
            45        12.18±3.25        36.92±8.35         47.61±16.30
            50        63.96±22.77       138.62±44.12       379.22±172.41
            55        181.90±46.51      568.75±139.87      932.59±279.08
            60        874.04±158.88   1934.37±192.66   –
            65        3150.50±784.02 5900.01±1367.47 –
            70        7387.15±1780.09 11411.35±1784.78 –




            (a) 30 to 40 digits                         (b) 45 to 55 digits




                                  (c) 60 to 70 digits

        Figure 1. Mean runtime complexity results as shown in Table 3

   11All computations have been conducted on a standard laptop with AMD Ryzen 7 5800H
processor (8-core 3.2 GHz) and 16GB RAM.
                             SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                 13


   For inputs with 30 − 40 digits, SSS is about 5 to 10 times faster than the SIQS
approaches. For inputs with 45 − 55 digits, SSS is about 2.2 to 3 times faster
than sSIQS. In this range, it becomes increasingly noticeable that pSIQS does not
make use of the large prime variant, which renders it significantly slower than the
other two approaches. For inputs with 60 − 70 digits, we hence only compared SSSf
against sSIQS. There, SSSf is about 1.5 to 2.2 times faster than sSIQS. One observes
that the runtime improvement of SSS over SIQS is particularly pronounced on the
smaller input sizes. An already mentioned reason is that SSS is overall simpler and
has much less overhead than the SIQS implementations. As the input size increases,
this fact becomes less important and the advantage of the efficiency of sieving
compared to the smooth-batch procedure becomes more and more pronounced.
However, the usage of SSSf allows to maintain an improvement on all considered
inputs.




           (a) 50 Digits: SSS                        (b) 50 Digits: sSIQS




           (c) 60 Digits: SSSf                       (d) 60 Digits: sSIQS

        Figure 2. Size distributions of candidate values in SSS and sSIQS

   In Section 3.2, we have already discussed the differences in the distribution of
the size of candidate values in both SSS and SIQS in terms of theoretical bounds.
In Figure 2, we show these distributions as they manifested in our practical exper-
iments. On the left-hand side, we can see histograms of the base-10 logarithms of
all candidates that occur in SSS and SSSf, i.e., that are members of C in Step 12 in
search. On the right-hand side, we consider similar histograms for all candidates
in sSIQS that remain after the sieving procedure and are thus likely to be smooth.
14                                    M. HITTMEIR

                                                 √
Almost all candidates in SSS are smaller than N , most of them between 5 to      √ 10
times. The candidates in SIQS are on average 102 − 105 times larger than N .
On the other hand, we can see on the y-axis that the number of candidates that
survive the sieving (and that have to be factored in order to determine if they are
really smooth) is around 102 − 103 times smaller than the number of candidates
we check in the smooth-batch procedure of SSS for inputs with 50-60 digits. While
the total number of elements in the sieved intervals is much larger, this reduces the
cost required for trial division.
   While it would certainly be interesting to conduct experiments on numbers with
75-95 digits, an implementation in a faster programming language (such as C)
would be necessary. Given the trend in Table 3, it is likely that there is a cutoff
somewhere in the range 75-95 digits where our current approach for SSS and SSSf
would start to be slower than SIQS. In order to make Smooth Subsum Search fit for
larger input sizes, we need to replace the brute-force approach for finding residues x
modulo M with small |x|/M by something even faster. The next section considers
possible avenues in this direction.

                            5. Possible Improvements
   Our chances of finding smooth numbers with SSS depend on the ratio of the
solution x and considered modulus M . The size of x directly affects the size of the
considered candidate f (x), while M divides f (x) by definition and is a factor that
is always smooth for all considered candidates. As a result, we would like to make
x as small and M as large as possible. In our current implementation, we basically
choose random moduli M and arbitrary values of x. For input numbers N that are
larger than the ones considered in our experiments, it may make sense to refine the
selection of the values of x and M . Three possible approaches come to mind:
     (1) For a fixed modulus M , try to find a related representation (x1 , . . . , xn )
         such that the value x returned by get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is minimized.
     (2) For a fixed value x, try to find divisors m dividing M such that the ratio
         (x (mod m))/m is minimized.
     (3) Use a different search technique to optimize both parameters at once by
         minimizing the objective function
                                      ψ = |x|/M.
Section 5.1, Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 refer to these approaches respectively. Be-
sides some proof-of-concept experiments, the described ideas have not been im-
plemented yet. Testing their applicability to improve SSS is a subject for future
research. Section 5.4 discusses some minor speedups of our code.
5.1. Lattice Reduction. We start with considering the approach of fixing M and
finding a suitable subsum, i.e., a corresponding representation (x1 , . . . , xn ) such
that x returned by get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is minimized. Let M = ρ1 . . . ρk , where
the ρi are primes in our factor base or (in contrast to our current implementation)
powers of such primes. For γi := (M/ρi )−1 (mod ρi ) and Mi := M γi /ρi , we may
write the possible values x returned by get x as
(5.1)              s1,j1 M1 + s2,j2 M2 + . . . + sk,jk Mk   (mod M ),
where si,ji are solutions of f (x) ≡ 0 (mod ρi ). Our ultimate goal is to find the
choice of (s1,j1 , . . . , sk,jk ) for which the value of (5.1) is minimized.
                                  SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                         15


   In principle, this problem is a modular version of the multiple choice subset-sum
problem (MCSS), which is discussed in [16, Sec. 11.10.1]. We consider k classes
Ni := {si,ji Mi (mod M ) : f (si,ji ) ≡ 0 (mod ρi )}, and the elements of the classes
are called weights. Denoting our weights as ωi,ji := si,ji Mi (mod M ), our goal is
to minimize the sum ω1,j1 + · · · + ωk,jk (mod M ). While MCSS is NP-complete,
there are multiple ways to approach this problem and solve it efficiently for certain
sizes of k or cardinalities of the classes Ni . For example, a time-space tradeoff is
discussed in [13, Section 6], where a similar MCSS occurs in a more theoretical
approach to integer factorization. There, the solution of the MCSS corresponds to
the sum S := p+q of the two prime factors of semiprime numbers N = pq. While it
would be enough to solve one MCSS instance in order to find S (and thereby factor
N ), the problem of the approach in [13] in terms of efficiency is that both k and
the classes Ni become quite large (around the size of log N ). In our present setting,
however, we are basically free to choose k and may also control the cardinalities
of the Ni by deciding in advance which prime powers to include as factors of M .
We may hence choose from the large variety of available techniques for minimizing
(5.1), one of which is based on lattice reduction.
   It is well known that the LLL-algorithm ([20]) for lattice reduction can be used
to solve a certain class of knapsack and subset-sum problems in polynomial-time
([28]). In particular, consider the standard subset-sum problem
(5.2)                              a1 x1 + · · · + a` x` = s,
where the ai and s are integers. The task is to find (x1 , . . . , x` ) ∈ {0, 1}` such that
(5.2) is satisfied. An important quantity is the density d := `/ log2 (maxi ai ). In [5]
it is shown that an oracle for finding the shortest vector in a special lattice can be
used to solve almost all subset-sum problems with d < 0.9408. In practice, this
oracle is replaced by an√application of the LLL-algorithm. The procedure works
as follows: For n := d 21 `e, we define the lattice L ⊆ Z`+1 generated by the rows
r1 , . . . , r`+1 of the matrix
                                                              
                                         1 0 · · · 0 na1
                                       0 1 · · · 0 na2 
                                                              
                                       .. .. . .       ..  ..  .
                                      . .
                                                    . .     . 
                                                               
                                       0 0 · · · 1 nan 
                                         1   1
                                         2   2   · · · 12 ns
                                                               P`
If (x1 , . . . , x` ) is a solution to (5.2), the vector v = i=1 xi ri −r`+1
                                                                         √ = (y1 , . . . , y` , 0)
is an element of L, where yi ∈ {− 21 , 12 } and, hence, kvk2 ≤ 12 `. Knowing v, it
is easy to retrieve a solution to the subset-sum problem. Therefore, the hope of
applying the LLL algorithm is that v will occur in the reduced basis of L.
    If we apply the approach of lattice reduction for standard subset-sum directly to
MCSS, the multiple-choice restriction (choosing exactly one element from each class
Ni ) is not accounted for in the definition of the lattice L, hence too many vectors
representing invalid solutions will be in the reduced basis. We now discuss an idea
for solving this problem. As mentioned, we consider the classes N1 , N2 , . . . , Nk , and
each class contains the weights ωi,1 , . . . , ωi,κi , where i = 1, . . . , k and κi := |Ni |.
Moreover, let α ∈ N be a natural number which will be specified later. Our idea
is to introduce a set of dummy subset-sum problems in the last few columns of
the matrix by which the lattice is defined. The purpose is to force the lattice
16                                         M. HITTMEIR


reduction algorithms into favoring vectors that correspond to choosing exactly one
weight from each class. For example, assume that κi√= 2 for every i and that s is
the target sum of our MCSS. Moreover, let n := d 12 ke. In this case, the matrix
defining the lattice is of the shape
                                                                 
                  1 0 0 0 · · · 0 0 α 0 · · · 0 nω1,1
                0 1 0 0 · · · 0 0 α 0 · · · 0 nω1,2 
                                                                 
                0 0 1 0 · · · 0 0 0 α · · · 0 nω2,1 
                                                                 
                0 0 0 1 · · · 0 0 0 α · · · 0 nω2,2 
(5.3)                                                          ..  .
                                                                 
                .. .. .. .. . .         .. .. .. .. . .   ..
               . . . .
                                     . . . . .          . .    . 
                                                                  
                0 0 0 0 · · · 1 0 0 0 · · · α nωk,1 
                                                                 
                0 0 0 0 · · · 0 1 0 0 · · · α nωk,2 
                  1   1    1  1
                  2   2    2  2   · · · 12 12 α α · · · α     ns
So in addition to what we have seen in the matrix for the standard subset-sum
problem, we add one additional column for each class, namely
                      (α, α, 0, 0, . . . , 0, α)T , (0, 0, α, α, . . . , 0, α)T
and so on. It is clear how the definition of this matrix may be generalized to classes
withPmore than two weights in them. Let us consider this general case, and set
` = i κi . If (x1 , . . . , x` ) is a binary vector encoding a solution to the MCSS (in
the same way as described above for standard subset-sum), then the vector
                          `
                          X
                     v=          xi ri − r`+1 = (y1 , . . . , y` , 0, · · · , 0, 0)
                           i=1
                                                                                     √
with yi ∈ {− 21 , 12 } will be in the lattice L ⊆ Z`+k+1 , and satisfies kvk2 = 21 k.
   Besides searching for a short vector in the lattice L, we may also reduce MCSS
to a specific Closest Vector Problem (CVP). This can be achieved by considering
the lattice L0 defined by the matrix in (5.3) without the last row, and then defining
the target vector t := (0, . . . , 0, α, α, . . . α, N s)T . We already know that the vector
in L0 corresponding to the solution (x1 , . . . , x` ) is very close to t. In the context
of our research on the idea in [13], we conducted proof-of-concept experiments
and noticed that this CVP approach works much better in practice than the SVP
approach discussed above. One apparent  √            reason is that there can be vectors in L
that are still much shorter than 12 k in the euclidean norm. Most of these vectors
relate to some combination of the weights in the last column of (5.3) that sums to
0 and omit the last row. The formulation of the CVP prevents this behavior.
   We may transform our modular MCSS into an ordinary MCSS by defining the
class N0 := {0, M, 2M, . . . (k − 1)M } and setting the approximative target sum
s = (k − 1)M . In addition, note that the LLL approach described above only works
for an exact target sum. However, [15, Section 6] shows how one may reduce any
approximate MCSS instance to an exact one by dividing all weights by the approx-
imate bound. Of course, there are several other aspects and details to consider,
and we will elaborate on this approach in future work. One goal would be to prove
an analogue of the standard subset-sum density result in [5] for our adaptation to
MCSS. Such a result would also inform the choice of M in our SSS setting. As
already mentioned, we want to take M as large as possible. Using lattice reduction
for subsequently finding a relatively small value x in the related subsum has the
potential of increasing our chances of finding smooth values of polynomials f .
                                   SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                           17


5.2. Small modular roots of linear polynomials. Let us now assume that we
fix the value x (with regards to a certain modulus M ) and try to find divisors
m of M such that the ratio (x (mod m))/m is minimized. In principle, this is
very close to what we are doing in our current implementation. However, we are
basically brute-forcing the search for such a pair (x, m) by choosing all divisors m
of M composed of five prime factors or more as possible moduli. One technique
that might improve this step by allowing us to choose larger M is Coppersmith’s
method ([4]). In particular, consider the following result ([22, Theorem 3]).
Theorem 5.1. Let M be an integer which has an unknown divisor m ≥ M β ,
where 0 < β ≤ 1. Let 0 < ε < 17 β. Furthermore, let g(X) be a univariate monic
polynomial of degree δ. Then we can find all solutions x0 for g(X) ≡ 0 mod m
with
                                        1 β2
                                |x0 | ≤ M δ −ε .
                                        2
The running time is polynomial in ε−1 , δ and log M .
   Assume that there is some divisor m ≥ M β of M such that the residue x0 of x
                                  2
modulo m satisfies |x0 | ≤ 12 M β −ε . Then we can find x0 by running Theorem 5.1
with the polynomial g(X) = X − x. Having found x0 , it is easy to determine the
corresponding divisor m and, thus, a suitable pair (x0 , m) with low ratio. Solving
linear equations modulo unknown divisors has also been studied in [21] and [9].
While this idea appears interesting in theory, it is not yet clear whether it is actually
applicable to our problem. The main question is how to choose M and β to ensure
the existence of pairs (x0 , m) that satisfy the bounds. If Theorem 5.1 is not suitable
for application to our problem, we will explore other approaches in this direction.

5.3. A genetic algorithm. Finally, we assume an unrestricted search approach
that chooses x and M together in an attempt to minimize the objective function
ψ = |x|/M . For example, we could comb through different choices of x and M ,
save all pairs (x, M ) for which ψ is below a certain bound in a set of candidates
C, and regularly apply the smooth-batch procedure to C to find smooth values
of f (x). This idea was the starting point for the SSSf implementation that we
applied to integers with 60 to 70 decimal digits. However, there may be more
elaborated approaches to quickly generate (and identify) suitable pairs (x, M ). One
such possibility is a genetic algorithm ([8]). In general, genetic algorithms solve an
optimization problem by representing the search space by a number of individuals
(the “population”) that represent possible solutions. Each individual is represented
by a so-called “chromosome” that reflects its properties. In our case, we may just
use the representation vectors (x1 , . . . , xn ) as discussed in the beginning of Section 3.
The next step is to find the best individuals in the population with regards to a
fitness function. Here, we could use a version of our objective function ψ = |x|/M .
Finally, the best n individuals are selected as “parents” for the next generation,
which is obtained by applying certain changes (the “crossovers” and “mutations”) to
the chromosomes. For example, we could change a random value in a chromosome
(mutation), or we could take the chromosomes from two parents (say, (x1 , . . . , xn )
and (y1 , . . . , yn )) and generate a child chromosome as (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , yi , . . . , yn ) for
some random index i (crossover). As soon as we have obtained enough chromosomes
for the next generation, the whole process starts again, i.e., we choose the best
individuals and apply mutation and crossover.
18                                  M. HITTMEIR


   Using the chromosomes and the fitness function as discussed above, we could
immediately apply a genetic algorithm to solve the SSS problem. However, the main
difficulty in improving the current implementation is in finding suitable mutation
and crossover operations. Ideally, they are not totally random, but instead have
a tendency of generating individuals with a smaller ratio of x and M than their
parents. It may therefore make sense to combine the genetic algorithm with the
ideas discussed in the previous subsections.
5.4. Further speedups. In addition to the Knuth-Schroeppel multiplier and Bern-
stein’s optimizations for the smooth-batch procedure discussed at the end of Sec-
tion 3.1, there are certainly other ways to improve SSS. Here are four examples.
      • The random choice of indices in the global search (Step 1 in search) is
         not optimized. Recent tests showed that removing a few of the smallest
         primes from S leads to a small, but consistent speedup of SSS compared
         to the currently reported runtimes. It may hence make sense to not only
         introduce an upper bound (determined by n) for the primes in the small
         factor base, but also a lower bound.
      • We may control the batch size (i.e., the cardinality of C) in smooth batch.
         At the moment, we just apply the smooth-batch procedure at the end
         of each run of the main loop in search. It might be better to collect
         more candidates until we have reached a certain number, and then applying
         smooth batch. This is particularly true for SSSf, as the cardinality of the
         filtered candidate set Cf might actually be quite small after just one run of
         the search loop.
      • One can certainly fine-tune the currently used parameters. For example,
         our current choices of ρ and δ in SSSf (Table 2) are not necessarily optimal.
      • Due to the simplicity of SSS, the whole procedure is cut out for paralleliza-
         tion. Different runs of search are independent from one another, so we may
         easily use more than one processor for the collection of smooth relations.

                                    6. Summary
   This paper presented Smooth Subsum Search, a new heuristic search approach
for finding smooth values of polynomials. We have applied SSS as part of an integer
factorization algorithm. For inputs between 30 and 70 digits, we compared SSS to
the Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve. Our results show that SSS runs multiple times
faster for inputs with 30 to 55 digits. SSSf, an improved version of the original
procedure, is still 1.5 to 2.2 times faster on the considered inputs with 60 to 70
digits. In addition, we have presented possible ideas for achieving speedups and
making the method efficient for factoring larger numbers. Our future research will
concern a detailed investigation of these approaches. In particular, the lattice-based
approach in Section 5.1 for solving MCSS problems could have other applications
besides integer factorization. We will also work on the optimizations of the current
implementation discussed in Section 5.4. Finally, we intend to explore further
applications of SSS in other algorithms that also depend on finding smooth values
of polynomials.
Implementation. An implementation of SSS as well as the code for the run-
time experiments conducted in Section 4 is available at https://github.com/
sbaresearch/smoothsubsumsearch.
                                 SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                          19


                                        References
 [1] D. J. Bernstein, How to find smooth parts of integers, https://cr.yp.to/factorization/
     smoothparts-20040510.pdf, 2004.
 [2] H. Boender, H. J. J. te Riele, Factoring Integers with Large-Prime Variations of the Qua-
     dratic Sieve, Exp. Math., 5: 257–273, 1996.
 [3] S. Contini, Factoring integers with the self-initializing quadratic sieve, Masters Thesis, U.
     Georgia, 1997.
 [4] D. Coppersmith, Finding a Small Root of a Univariate Modular Equation, Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, 1070: 155–165, 1996.
 [5] M. J. Coster et al., Improved low-density subset sum algorithms, Computational Complexity,
     2: 111–128, 1992.
 [6] R. Crandall, C. Pomerance, Prime Numbers, A Computational Perspective, Second Edition,
     Springer Science+Business Media Inc., New York, 2005.
 [7] J. D. Dixon, Asymptotically Fast Factorization of Integers, Mathematics of Computation,
     36 (153): 255–260, 1981.
 [8] D. E. Goldberg, J. H. Holland, Genetic Algorithms and Machine Learning, Machine Learn-
     ing, 3: 95–99, 1988.
 [9] M. Herrmann, A. May, Solving Linear Equations Modulo Divisors: On Factoring Given Any
     Bits, In: Pieprzyk, J. (eds) Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2008, Lecture Notes in
     Computer Science 5350, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[10] D. Harvey, An exponent one-fifth algorithm for deterministic integer factorisation, Math.
     Comp., 90 (332), 2937–2950, 2021.
[11] M. Hittmeir, A babystep-giantstep method for faster deterministic integer factorization,
     Math. Comp., 87 (314): 2915–2935, 2018.
[12] M. Hittmeir, A time-space tradeoff for Lehman’s deterministic integer factorization method,
     Math. Comp., 90 (330): 1999–2010, 2021.
[13] M. Hittmeir, Integer factorization as subset-sum problem, arXiv:2205.10074, 2022.
[14] D. Harvey, M. Hittmeir, A log-log speedup for exponent one-fifth deterministic integer fac-
     torisation, Math. Comp., 91 (335): 1367–1379, 2021.
[15] N. Howgrave-Graham, A. Joux, New generic algorithms for hard knapsacks, EUROCRYPT
     2010, 235–256, 2010.
[16] H. Kellerer, U. Pferschy, D. Pisinger, Knapsack Problems, Springer, Berlin, 2004.
[17] Ç. K. Koç and S. N. Arachchige, A fast algorithm for gaussian elimination over GF(2) and
     its implementation on the GAPP, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 13 (1):
     118–122, 1991.
[18] A. K. Lenstra, Integer Factoring, Designs, Codes and Cryptography, 19: 101-128, 2000.
[19] A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra (eds.), The development of the number field sieve, Lecture
     Notes in Math. 1554, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1993.
[20] A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, L. Lovász, Factoring Polynomials with Rational Coefficients,
     Ann. of Math., 261(4): 515–534, 1982.
[21] Y. Lu, R. Zhang, L. Peng, D. Lin, Solving Linear Equations Modulo Unknown Divisors:
     Revisited., In: Iwata, T., Cheon, J. (eds) Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2015,
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9452, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015.
[22] A. May, Using LLL-Reduction for Solving RSA and Factorization Problems, In: Nguyen,
     P., Vallée, B. (eds) The LLL Algorithm. Information Security and Cryptography. Springer,
     Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
[23] J. Milan, Factoring Small to Medium Size Integers: An Experimental Comparison, inria-
     0018864v2, 2010.
[24] M. A. Morrison, J. Brillhart, A Method of Factoring and the Factorization of F7, Mathe-
     matics of Computation, 29 (129): 183–205, 1975.
[25] C. Pomerance, Analysis and Comparison of Some Integer Factoring Algorithms, In: H. W.
     Lenstra and R. Tijdeman, Eds., Computational Methods in Number Theory, Math Centre
     Tracts—Part 1, Math Centrum, Amsterdam, 89–139, 1982.
[26] C. Pomerance, A Tale of Two Sieves, Notices of the AMS, 43 (12): 1473–1485, 1996.
[27] H. Riesel, Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for Factorization, Progress in Mathe-
     matics (Volume 126), 2nd Edition, Birkhäuser Boston, 1994.
20                                     M. HITTMEIR


 [28] C. Schnorr, M. Euchner, Lattice Basis Reduction: Improved Practical Algorithms and Solv-
      ing Subset Sum Problems, Mathematical Programming, 66: 181–199, 1994.
 [29] R. D. Silverman, The Multiple Polynomial Quadratic Sieve, Mathematics of Computation,
      48 (177): 329–339, 1987.
 [30] S.S. Wagstaff Jr., The Joy of Factoring, American Math. Society, Providence, RI, 2013.


     Email address: mhittmeir@sba-research.org
