                                             Shor’s algorithm with fewer (pure) qubits
arXiv:quant-ph/0601097v1 15 Jan 2006




                                                                       Christof Zalka
                                                                    November 26, 2024

                                                                           Abstract
                                                In this note we consider optimised circuits for implementing Shor’s
                                            quantum factoring algorithm. First I give a circuit for which non of the
                                            about 2n qubits need to be initialised (though we still have to make the
                                            usual 2n measurements later on). Then I show how the modular additions
                                            in the algorithm can be carried out with a superposition of an arithmetic
                                            sequence. This makes parallelisation of Shor’s algorithm easier. Finally
                                            I show how one can factor with only about 1.5n qubits, and maybe even
                                            fewer.


                                       1    Introduction
                                       Over the years people have looked into how Shor’s quantum factoring algorithm
                                       could actually be implemented on a quantum computer. In particular people
                                       have tried to optimise the algorithm (the quantum part of it). An early work
                                       was by César Miquel in 1996 [1]. Later, people were mostly trying to reduce the
                                       size of a quantum computer needed for factoring (thus the number of qubits).
                                       The circuit of Stéphane Beauregard from 2003 [2] uses only 2n + 3 qubits to
                                       factor an n-bit number.
                                           An important observation has always been that much of the computation
                                       can be done classically. A lot of quantities can be “precomputed” conven-
                                       tionally. For the most part the quantum circuits are just classical reversible
                                       circuits to compute a modular exponentiation, which is reduced to many (ac-
                                       tually some 4n2 ) modular additions of n-bit numbers. A non-classical circuit is
                                       Tom Draper’s addition technique from 2000 [3] using a quantum Fourier trans-
                                       form which allows to do without the additional n work qubits which are usually
                                       needed to hold the carry bits.
                                           The first observation in this context which I present is more of theoretical
                                       than of practical interest. Parker and Plenio ([4], 2000) have pointed out that
                                       n of the 2n qubits used in these implementations need not be initialised (set
                                       to |0i) at the beginning. (But in the title and abstract of their paper they
                                       seem to claim even more than that). I now show how the algorithm can be
                                       modified so that actually none of the about 2n qubits need to be initialised.
                                       Still, in mine as in their algorithm we have to do some 2n measurements in


                                                                               1
the course of the algorithm. As measuring a qubit also resets it, it would
therefore not be correct to say that we need no pure qubits at all. The technique
works by modifying the (controlled) modular multiplications. Instead of the
usual modular multiplication |α, 0i → |a · α, 0i, (where a is a classically known
number) I show how to do |α, βi → |a · α, a−1 · βi without need for further
work qubits. Instead of the usual 2 modular multiplications for this step (one
by a, the other by a−1 , everything mod N ), I now need 3 of them. In a further
observation I show how the slowdown caused by this can be compensated by
using a “trinary” quantum Fourier transform.
    The second observation is of a different kind. It looks at the modular addi-
tions (modulo the number N to be factored) out of which the algorithm essen-
tially consists. The fact that these are not usual additions, but modular ones
causes some complications (effectively several additions have to be made). In
particular when using Draper’s “Fourier-addition” we need to Fourier transform
back to the usual basis after each addition, which is costly. I now propose an
approximate way to compute modular additions with a quantum method (as
opposed to a classical reversible circuit). We need to make the n-qubit registers
larger by some O(log n) qubits. Then instead of P  a number |bi with 0 ≤ b < N ,
we consider an equal (“uniform”) superposition x |b + xN i. Using this tech-
nique allows to simplify the overall outline of the algorithm and may allow a
considerable speedup, mainly because it allows a lot of parallelisation. The
depth of the overall circuit for Shor’s algorithm can then be reduced to O(n2 ).
    The third result gives a sizable reduction in the number of qubits needed in
Shor’s algorithm. Namely from the present number of about 2n qubits (Beau-
regard) to about 1.5n. I show two things. One is how to replace modular
multiplication by an n-bit factor with two multiplications by factors half this
length. Then I show how such “short” multiplications can be done with accord-
ingly fewer qubits. (If somehow we manage to further factor these multipliers,
further reductions down to closer to 1.0n would be possible.) The presentation,
especially for this third result, is sketchy.


2      Review of circuits for Shor’s algorithm
The number N we want to factor is an n-bit number, thus n = ⌈log2 N ⌉ (log2 N
rounded up). N may e.g. be the product of two unknown large prime numbers,
thus N = p·q. The problem of factorisation can be reduced to finding the period
of the periodic function f (x) = ax mod N , where a is essentially an arbitrary
integer (really 0 < a < N and a should be coprime with N ). The “order finding”
quantum algorithm to do this can be described as follows. We have a 2n-qubit
register and an n-qubit register:
    22n
     X  −1                22n
                           X  −1                       22n
                                                        X  −1
                                       x
             |xi|0i   →            |xi|a mod N i   →            F T (|xi) |ax mod N i
     x=0                   x=0                          x=0

After Fourier transforming the first (2n-qubit) register, we measure it. (From
the result, the period of ax mod N can be computed classically with good

                                             2
success probability.) The modular exponentiation can be computed by noting
(everything is understood to be modN ):
                   2n−1                   x1  22 x2           2n−1 x2n−1
  ax=x0 +2x1 +...+2     x2n−1
                              = ax 0 · a2    · a       · . . . · a2
                                                       i
where x0 , x1 , . . . are the bits of x. The numbers a2 can be computed through
repeated squaring (at every step reducing mod N ). Thus in the end we really
only have to make a sequence of (modular) multiplications, each conditioned
on a different bit of x. Now look at the subsequent Fourier transform and
measurement of the x-register. Fourier transform and measurement can be
combined (“Fourier sampling”, “semiclassical Fourier transform”) so that we
first measure the high bits of the x-register (one after the other, starting from
the highest value one). Indeed the whole procedure can be described as simply
measuring one qubit after another, each in a basis depending on the previous
measurement outcomes (of the higher qubits). Given that the x-register is
initially in a product state, we see that we need not keep these √ 2n qubits all at
the same time. For each x-qubit we can prepare it in state 1/ 2(|0i + |1i), then
use it to control a modular multiplication and then measure it in the appropriate
basis. (Note that for this to work, we have to carry out the multiplications with
   i
a2 in “reversed order”, thus i = 2n − 1, . . . , 1, 0.) Thus instead of the whole
2n-qubit x-register, now we need only 1 qubit.
     Each modular multiplication is of the form |αi → |a · αi, where α is the
number initially in the register, and we simply use “a” for any number we want
to multiply with (really it’s a power of a). Parker and Plenio [4] have pointed
out that if we don’t initialise the register, we effectively compute α · ax mod N
instead of ax mod N , where α is the number that happens to be initially in
the register. (Why we can think of “not initialised” in this way is explained
later.) For most α this function (of x) has the same periodicity as the original
one (namely for all α that are coprime with N ). So Parker and Plenio said that
none of the initial qubits needed to be initialised. For this they assumed that
they had a unitary operator that would modularly multiply a register with any
given a coprime with N (indeed this operation is reversible and thus unitary):
Ua : |αi → |a · αi. But we don’t know how to do this efficiently without a supply
of another O(n) properly initialised qubits. In the usual technique we use an
auxilliary n-qubit register and make two steps whereby we add a multiple of
one register to the other register (everything modN ):
        |α, 0i   →    |α, a · αi   →    |α − a−1 · (a · α), a · αi = |0, a · αi
where in the second step we use (modular) multiplication with a−1 (modN )
(which we can precompute classically using Euclid’s algorithm).


3     Not initialising any qubits
The above sequence of operations doesn’t give the desired result if the auxilliary
register is not initialised to |0i, but this can easily be fixed. We start by applying

                                          3
the usual two steps to registers in any initial state but add an appropriate third
step:

|α, βi → |α, β + aαi → |α − a−1 (β + aα) = −a−1 β, β + aαi → | − a−1 β, aαi

Thus by adding a SWAP and multiplication by −1 (which is rather easy), we
can do |α, βi → |a · α, a−1 · βi. This is just as good for order finding, as the
function (ax α, a−x β) has still the same period which we were looking for (at
least for most numbers α, β). We can also write the sequence of operations as
2 × 2 matrices (acting on a pair of numbers in ZN ):
                                                                
            +1        1           1 −a−1        1         α          aα
                                                               =
       −1             a 1              1        a 1       β         a−1 β

    The technique which was described here for modular multiplication actu-
ally works in any group setting and can thus also be used for Shor’s discrete
logarithm (dlog) algorithm.
    Finally a remark on what it means to not initialise some qubits. Clearly
the algorithm may fail if e.g. someone has intentionally prepared the qubits in
some “bad” state. But we can always ensure that they are in the maximally
mixed state, namely by randomly applying one of the four Pauli operators to
each qubit. I thus have simply assumed that “uninitialised registers” are in this
maximally mixed state, which is equivalent to thinking that the register is at
random in one of the “computational” basis states |αi.
    Actually so far we have only shown that the two main registers involved in
Shor’s algorithm need not be initialised, but there are a few more qubits, e.g.
in Beauregards circuit we need 3 more qubits. As this is a constant (and small)
number, we still get a reasonable success probability for Shor’s algorithm if we
don’t initialise these qubits, too. Thus one may claim that non of the initial
qubits need to be initialised.

3.1    Saving time with a trinary quantum Fourier transform
The multiplication steps are conditioned on bits of x, thus either we multiply
(modularly) with a, or we do nothing. But if we can do |α, βi → |aα, a−1 βi, it is
clear that by swapping the 2 registers before and after the operation, we can also
do the inverse: |α, βi → |a−1 α, aβi. Note that such controlled swaps are cheap
compared to the multiplication steps. Thus effectively we can multiply (say the
first register) with either a, 1, or with a−1 , depending on some control qubits.
(Note that this “control” hardly increases the cost as the individual modular
additions, out of which the multiplications consist, are anyways conditional.)
Thus is makes sense to take advantage of all three possibilities. Multiplication
with a, 1, or a−1 is very similar to multiplication with a2 , a, or 1, it only shifts
the final (periodic) function by a constant amount: f (x) → f (x − const.). Thus
we now imagine that x is given in “trinary” form x = x0 + 3x1 + 32 x2 + . . . +
           ′
x2n′ −1 32n −1 , where n′ is smaller than n by about a factor of log2 3. Note that



                                         4
it is not important whether we store the bits of x in actual physical “qutrits”
or whether we e.g. use 2 qubits.
    The final Fourier transform in Shor’s algorithm now has to be replaced with
                            ′
a trinary one (of order 32n ). Everything works just as well with such a trinary
quantum Fourier transform, in particular the “semiclassical” version is anal-
ogous and we can essentially proceed as before: Prepare a “qutrit” (possibly
realised with 2 qubits) in an equal superposition. Use it to control a modu-
lar multiplication (now 3 possibilities!). Then measure the “qutrit” in a basis
determined by the previous measurement outcomes.
    [For deriving the circuit for a trinary (or any “p-ary” of order pn ) quantum
Fourier transform and seeing that this works, I only give some hints.      I find it
                                                               √ P
useful to consider the transform of a basis state |bi → 1/ . . . x ω bx |xi. It
turns out that this is again a product state, where the state of a given “qudit”
depends only on some of the original digits of b (from b0 up to a maximum).
Start by seeing how the one qudit which depends on all original digits can be
obtained (namely by a generalised Hadamard transform, followed by controlled
phases). From there on down, each qudit can be obtained in a similar way. Thus
the circuit has the same structure for any “p-ary” quantum Fourier transform.]
    The dominant cost in the controlled multiplications are the individual mul-
tiplication steps. In the modified algorithm we have 3 instead of 2 of these. But
this slowdown is more than compensated through the use of the trinary Fourier
transform. Thus we now even use a bit less time by a factor 3/2 · log3 2 ≈
0.946 . . ..


4    Modular addition with equal “coset superpo-
     sitions”
Most of Shor’s algorithm actually consists of (conditional) modular additions of
a fixed (classically known) number to a quantum register: |αi → |α + a mod N i.
This operation is of course reversible (just subtract a modulo N), but it can be
a bit cumbersome to implement it. If we first simply add and only then reduce
modulo N (thus possibly subtracting N ), then this last step would not be re-
versible. What one can do is to first make a comparison (of the quantum register
with a suitable “classical” number) which determines whether N will have to be
subtracted. Then with the final result in the quantum register, one can make
another suitable comparison to “uncompute” this control qubit. Each of these
comparisons essentially amounts to an addition (or rather a subtraction). And,
what is worse, when using Draper’s Fourier-addition technique, each time one
has to Fourier transform back to the usual basis for reading out the result of a
comparison.
    I now propose a modular addition technique which is faster, although it uses
a few more qubits. Instead of representing a number in ZN simply by a number
b in the range 0 . . . N −1, we prepare an equal superposition of manyPterms of the
arithmetic sequence b + x · N with x = 0, 1, . . .. Thus we do |bi → x |b + xN i.



                                         5
It is enough if the new register is larger by some O(log n) qubits (actually some
2 log n + 10 qubits should be more than enough for Shor’s algorithm) and the
range of x will be accordingly.
    Now we simply add (non-modularly) the number a to this register:
                   xmax
                    X−1                            xmax
                                                    X−1
                           |b + xN i       →              |a + b + xN i
                     x=0                            x=0
                                                                P
The point
       P is that the outcome P is close to the (desired) outcome x |(a + b) mod N + xN i.
Thus x |a + b + xN i ≈ x |(a + b) mod N + xN i, in the sense that the fi-
delity (overlap) is close to 1. The “ladder” of peaks in the superposition simply
may get shifted by one period. So the loss of fidelity per addition is on the order
of O(1/xmax ) and thus can be made very small.

4.1    Converting to the “coset representation”
First let’s see how we can transform back and forth between the usual “rep-
resentative element” representation
                                 P      (of a number in ZN ) |bi and the “coset
superposition” representation x |b + xN i. (Here the coset is given by the el-
ements b + xN of the arithmetic sequence, the subgroup being the multiples of
N and the overall group are the integers Z.) Given |bi, we need another     Psmall
                                                                     √
register prepared in an equal (“uniform”, “flat”) superposition 1/ xmax x |xi.
It is easiest to prepare this superposition if xmax is a power of 2. (It may be ad-
vantageous to choose a different xmax , and in this case, too it is not difficult to
prepare the equal superposition.) Then we apply a simple (classical reversible)
operation to these 2 registers. Thus:
                            xmax
                             X−1
                     1
        prepare    √                |xi,           then do |bi|xi →       |b + xN i
                    xmax      x=0

This last step is not hard to carry out. Imagine that we first extend the range
of the first (“b”) register (by adding a few qubits in state |0i at the top end of
the register). Then we go through the bits of x from least significant to most
significant. Conditioned on bit xi we add 2i N to the first register. Then we
uncompute xi by checking whether the content of the first register is ≥ 2i N .

4.2    Use in Shor’s algorithm
First a quick review of how modular multiplications are decomposed into n mod-
ular additions. (Actually this is similar to the decomposition of the modular
exponentiation into modular multiplications.) The individual modular multi-
plication steps are of the form |αi|βi → |αi|aα + βi (again “a” stand for any
power of a). We write (everything modN ):

      αa    =     (α0 + 2α1 + . . .) a     =       α0 a + α1 (2a) + α2 (22 a) + . . .



                                               6
                                               i
The numbers 2j a (really we will have 2j a2 ) can again be precomputed and
reduced modN . Thus everything is decomposed into n controlled modular ad-
ditions of precomputed integers in the range 0 . . . N − 1. Each addition is con-
ditioned on a different qubit of the first (“α-”) register.
    We can leave the “accumulation register” in the coset representation during
all these n additions. Under the plausible assumptions that the precomputed
numbers on average have a size of about N/2 and that on average we add up
only about half of these numbers, the sum will be around n/2 · N/2. I think
that by subtracting (from the accumulation register) a multiple of N close to
this, we can improve the fidelity (thus reduce the error of the modular addition
technique).
    So for a modular multiplication step |α, βi → |α, β + aαi we would leave the
second register through all n modular additions in the “coset” representation.
Usually we would imagine that the first (“control”) register would be in the
usual representation, but actually we can also leave it in the coset representation.
Essentially this means that instead of multiplying with α we may multiply with
some α + xN , but modulo N this doesn’t make any difference. A disadvantage
is that we now would have to carry out some O(log n) more modular addition
steps (per modular multiplication) and also that the first register needs this
many more qubits.
    Thus in practise we may prefer to switch the first register back to the usual
representation while it acts as a control register. But if we don’t, the layout
of Shor’s algorithm becomes quite simple. We have to convert the 2 registers
to the “coset representation” only at the beginning, and later no switching
back will be needed. Each multiplication step simply consists of a sequence
of n + O(log n) regular additions. The only thing that doesn’t look simple
are the “strange” precomputed numbers we have to add... :-) Finally note
that while modular multiplication can be carried out with both registers in the
“coset representation”, this wouldn’t work as well for an addition of the form
|α, βi → |α, β + αi as then the fidelity loss would be large, at least for the
present scheme.
    Note that the additions we do, naturally come out to be modulo the size
2#qubits of the register, independently of whether we use a classical reversible
method or Draper’s Fourier-addition. This is no problem for the approximative
modular addition described here. We can choose the parameters such that a
modular reduction never occurs, but even if it does, the error per modular
addition is still small.
    If we use Draper’s Fourier addition, we can leave the second (“target”) reg-
ister Fourier transformed for a whole sequence of additions. This allows for a
lot of parallelisation, as each addition can be carried out in a single time step.
(I think approximative classical reversible techniques exist which allow a simi-
lar parallelisation of addition and also don’t need auxiliary work qubits. Here
“approximative” would mean that the circuit works correctly for all but a few
inputs, which should be good enough for Shor’s algorithm. For such techniques
see e.g. my 1998 work on implementing Shor’s algorithm.)



                                         7
4.3    Error estimate
The
P question is how large we have to make the “equal coset superposition”
   x |b + xN i (with x = 0 . . . xmax − 1) to get a good enough approximation
for Shor’s algorithm. Roughly we can argue that in each modular addition we
loose about 1/xmax in fidelity. In order to keep the overall fidelity loss of the
4n2 additions at, say, below 1%, we see that xmax ≈ 1000n2 should be more
that enough. This corresponds to using some 2 log n + 10 additional qubits for
the coset representation of a register. Note that this “analysis” is not rigorous
as it assumes that losses in fidelity simply add up. While in general errors
can behave worse than that, I think that in the present case the assumption is
correct. (A rather easy “worst case” analysis shows that an xmax on the order
of n4 is provably enough.)

4.4    Related work
In 2000 Hales and Hallgren [5] have published an improved approximate tech-
nique to carry out the quantum Fourier transform for any order, e.g. for a
large prime. Their technique is simpler, faster and uses fewer qubits than Ki-
taev’s earlier method. One might think of using their technique to carry out a
quantum Fourier transform of order N on the register to which we have to add
numbers modulo N . Then Draper’s Fourier addition technique could be used
to directly do additions modulo N . Actually the “coset superposition” tech-
nique which I propose is very
                           P similar to this. Hales and Hallgren also first carry
out the conversion |bi → x |b + xN i and then Fourier transform the whole
register (thus modulo a power of 2). Because they have Fourier transformed
a “periodic” state, they get peaks which they then “extract” to get the final
result. If in conjunction with my “coset superpositions” we also use Draper’s
                                    ′
Fourier addition (modulo some 2n ), we thus essentially do the same as Hales
and Hallgren, except their last step, the “extraction” of the Fourier peaks, which
fortunately turns out to not being necessary.
    Also I understand that John Watrous [6] has been using uniform superpo-
sitions of subgroups (and cosets) in his work on quantum algorithms for solv-
able groups. Thus he also used coset superpositions to represent elements of
the factor group (and probably also to carry out factor group operations on
them). In our case the overall group are the integers, the (normal) subgroup
are the multiples of N . The factor group who’s elements we want to represent
is ZN ∼= Z/(N Z). We now represent these elements by superpositions over the
cosets of the form b + xN . A problem in our case is that we can do things only
approximatively as the integers and the cosets are infinite sets.

4.5    Some wishful thinking...
As I have pointed out it has already been shown that much of the computation in
Shor’s algorithm can be carried out classically (as pre- and post-processing). It
would be nice if the quantum part of Shor’s algorithm could be further reduced


                                        8
(at the expense of a “reasonable” amount of additional classical computation).
E.g. it is not clear whether maybe a modular multiplication step could not be
simplified. It is not even clear whether we could not carry it out with only O(n)
quantum gates and maybe also with only one n-qubit register, although I doubt
that this is possible.
    It would also be nice to find better quantum techniques for other modular
arithmetic operations. Namely a while ago I have unsuccessfully tried to think
about how “modular inversion” x → x−1 ( mod N ) could be done more elegantly
(maybe using Fourier transforms or the like) than the classical (and “classic”
:-) ) technique. In 2003 with John Proos in a work on elliptic curves we used a
cumbersome reversible implementation of Euclid’s algorithm to do that.
    Also note that further simplifications of Shor’s algorithm might lead to some
insights (into quantum computation). E.g. if the quantum part could be reduced
to some more natural operations. Also nice would be if we could do without
any pure qubits and projective measurements, like the trace estimation problem
of Knill and Laflamme in their “power of one qubit” paper. Another possibly
practically useful advance would be to “break up” Shor’s algorithm into several
smaller (quantumly) independent quantum parts, but again I don’t see how
this could be achieved. One can also investigate the possibility to replace the
                                                       i
modular multiplications by numbers of the form a2 mod N by multiplications
with other powers of a or with any other suitably chosen numbers.


5      Shor’s algorithm with 1.5n qubits (maybe less)
5.1     Modular multiplication with smaller factors
Usually we have to multiply (mod N ) a quantum register with a fixed n-bit
number. Here I show that if this classical factor is shorter, we can accordingly
save qubits. Later I will show how we can do Shor’s algorithm with such shorter
factors, namely how we can replace a single n-bit factor by two n/2-bit factors.
    So say the classical factor “a” we want to multiply with has only n′ bits with
n < n, e.g. n′ = n/2. We want to do |αi → |a · α mod N i while using fewer
  ′

work qubits than usually. I propose the following sequence of three steps:

α (n bits)     →     a · α (n + n′ bits)   →
      a · α mod N (= a · α − q · N ) , q (n + n′ bits)   →   a · α mod N (n bits)

The first step is a usual multiplication (not modular). In the second step we
divide by N , getting the remainder and the (integer) quotient q. In the last
step we “uncompute” the quotient.
    The first step (normal multiplication) is rather straight-forward. It is a
sequence of controlled additions, conditioned on bits of α after each of which
the controlling bit is uncomputed. Note that this way the total number of qubits
is always at most n + n′ . We can go through the bits of α both ways but it’s a
bit easier if we go from most significant to least significant as then uncomputing


                                           9
the bits of α is easiest. (E.g. when a is odd the lowest bit of the evolving sum
is simply equal to the bit we need to uncompute.)
    The second step is the reduction modulo N . It is a usual division consisting
of a sequence of subtractions of 2i ·N for i = n′ , n′ −1, . . . , 0. For each subtraction
one bit of the quotient q is computed, from most to least significant, each bit
indicating whether the corresponding subtraction was done or not.
    The third step (uncomputing of q) is less straight forward. I show how the
reverse can be done, thus computing q from the remainder aα mod N = aα−qN .
First consider computing the remainder of this modulo a: (aα − qN ) mod a =
−qN mod a. Computing the remainder of a quantum register modulo a fixed
number is indeed not hard to do. We need an “accumulation” register into
which we can add numbers modulo a. For each qubit of the original quantum
register we then add, conditioned on this qubit, the (classically precomputed)
number 2i mod a. To directly obtain q (instead of −qN mod a) we now simply
replace these numbers with 2i (−N )−1 mod a.
    Thus in total we need only n + n′ qubits for modular multiplication with
factors of size n′ (with n′ < n).

5.2     Getting multiplication factors of size n/2
Usually in Shor’s algorithm we have to multiply by n-bit factors, namely by the
            i
numbers a2 mod N . If we could factor these numbers into smaller numbers,
we could accordingly save qubits. Here I show how we can write these numbers
as quotients (modN ) of two half size numbers. (Note that dividing by such
a number is simply the reverse of multiplying.) Say the original factor was
a. Now consider the extended Euclidean algorithm one would use to compute
a−1 mod N . In this algorithm we get a sequence of integer linear combinations
of a and N of the form r·a+k·N = r′ . In the course of the algorithm the integer
r gets larger while r′ gets smaller, while always |r| · |r′ | < N . By stopping
                                                                          √     the
algorithm in the middle we get two numbers r, r′ both of size about N , with
a = r′ /r mod N . (Note that the integer coefficients a and k can be negative,
but r′ is usually taken to remain positive.)
    Actually it’s not hard to show that there appears always a linear combination
(and sometimes two) in Euclid’s
                            √      algorithm where (the absolute values of) both
r and r′ are smaller than N .
    In summary this gives us a factoring algorithm with about 1.5n qubits. In
a more careful count I arrive at 1.5n + 2 qubits (when n is odd, round up).
For this I used a modular addition circuit which uses only 1 work qubit and of
course also Draper’s Fourier addition technique to save qubits. (By the way, I
wonder whether there is maybe a general way to get rid of a single work qubit,
e.g. at the expense of increasing the number of gates by some factor, say 8 ...?)

5.2.1    Even smaller factors?
If we could somehow write our n-bit factors a as a product (or quotient) of
even smaller factors we could further save qubits. One idea might be to try to


                                           10
(further) factor the n/2-bit numbers obtained above. A full factorisation would
be hard. (But still less hard than factoring n-bit numbers... actually one idea is
to use the quantum algorithm to do this. This wouldn’t increase the number of
qubits, but would increase the quantum running time quite a bit). Easier would
be to just look for small primefactors. At any rate for each step we would need
to have a choice of numbers which we could try to (partially) factor. Indeed
given the linear combinations in the middle of Euclid’s algorithm one can find
many r, r′ pairs with sizes of about n/2 bits. Also the n-bit factors a need
not be the numbers usually taken. (E.g. one can think of a scheme whereby
                                                                             i
one is allowed to use essentially arbitrary products of the numbers a2 mod N
for small ranges of i.) Note that we can’t hope to find enough fully “smooth”
numbers (numbers with only small primefactors), at least not for n-bit numbers,
as otherwise one could use this for efficient classical factoring... but I think that
maybe (classical) factorisation into small enough factors is possible to be able
to run Shor’s algorithm with only, say, 1.1n qubits.


6     Remarks
6.1    Useful for future real implementations?
Note that here we haven’t tried to find a “best” (most efficient) circuit for
future actual implementations. The tradeoffs one would like to make for physical
realisations are not clear, e.g. how many more qubits one is willing to use to
speed the algorithm up. Also in reality one probably needs many more qubits
for error correction and the spatial arrangement and connections between qubits
are an issue. Still, maybe some of the techniques worked out for abstract circuits
may one day be useful...

6.2    Optimisation of reversible and quantum circuits
There seem to be quite some opportunities for the optimisation of the quantum
part of a circuit (at the expense of a “reasonable” amount of classical computa-
tion). If we restrict just to classical reversible circuits the task can be formulated
as finding (efficiently computable) short circuits. Note that the possibility to
shift work to the classical (fixed) part gives us extra opportunities for optimi-
sation. Also the possibility of doing things only approximately (e.g. wrong for
a small fraction of the computational basis states) allows for extra possibilities.

6.3    Conclusions
We have sketched three results. One is that even fewer qubits need to be ini-
tialised for factoring than known so far. Then a non-classical modular addition
technique with “coset superpositions” was proposed which may be of use for par-
allelising computations. Finally I have shown how instead of the usual 2n + . . .
qubits, we can run Shor’s algorithm with only ⌈1.5n⌉ + 2 qubits. It seems likely
that this can be further reduced, at least somewhat.

                                         11
References
[1] C. Miquel, J.P. Paz and R. Perazzo, Factoring in a Dissipative Quantum
    Computer , Phys. Rev. A 54, 2605 (1996), also quant-ph/9601021
[2] S. Beauregard, Circuit for Shor’s algorithm using 2n+3 qubits, Quantum
    Information and Computation, Vol. 3, No. 2 (2003) pp. 175-185, also quant-
    ph/0205095
[3] T.Draper, Addition on a quantum computer, quant-ph/0008033
[4] S.Parker, M.Plenio, Efficient factorization with a single pure qubit and
    log N mixed qubits, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, (2000) 3049, also quant-
    ph/0001066
[5] S. Hallgren and L. Hales, An Improved Quantum Fourier Trans-
    form Algorithm and Applications, FOCS 2000, (also available at
    http://www.cs.caltech.edu/~hallgren/newqfs.pdf)
[6] John Watrous, Quantum algorithms for solvable groups, Proceedings of the
    33rd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 60-67, 2001, also
    quant-ph/0011023




                                     12
