                                                          SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH
                                             A HEURISTIC FOR PRACTICAL INTEGER FACTORIZATION


                                                                                MARKUS HITTMEIR
arXiv:2301.10529v2 [math.NT] 11 Jul 2023




                                                    Abstract. The two currently fastest general-purpose integer factorization al-
                                                    gorithms are the Quadratic Sieve and the Number Field Sieve. Both techniques
                                                    are used to find so-called smooth values of certain polynomials, i.e., values that
                                                    factor completely over a set of small primes (the factor base). As the names
                                                    of the methods suggest, a sieving procedure is used for the task of quickly
                                                    identifying smooth values among the candidates in a certain range. While the
                                                    Number Field Sieve is asymptotically faster, the Quadratic Sieve is still con-
                                                    sidered the most efficient factorization technique for numbers up to around 100
                                                    digits. In this paper, we challenge the Quadratic Sieve by presenting a novel
                                                    approach based on representing smoothness candidates as sums that are al-
                                                    ways divisible by several of the primes in the factor base. The resulting values
                                                    are generally smaller than those considered in the Quadratic Sieve, increasing
                                                    the likelihood of them being smooth. Using the fastest implementations of the
                                                    Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve in Python as benchmarks, a Python imple-
                                                    mentation of our approach runs consistently 5 to 7 times faster for numbers
                                                    with 45-100 digits, and around 10 times faster for numbers with 30-40 digits.
                                                    We discuss several avenues for further improvements and applications of the
                                                    technique.




                                                                                 1. Introduction
                                              Integer factorization is the task of computing the divisors of natural numbers.
                                           It is a problem with a long and fascinating history, and it is certainly among the
                                           most influential in algorithmic number theory. While there is a variety of algorithms
                                           significantly faster than the brute-force search for divisors, it is still an open problem
                                           to construct a technique that efficiently factors general numbers with hundreds to
                                           thousands of digits. The hardness of this problem is fundamental for the security
                                           of widely used cryptographical schemes, most prominently the RSA cryptosystem.
                                           Nevertheless, there is no proof for its hardness besides the fact that decades of
                                           efforts have failed to construct a more efficient technique.
                                              Quite regularly, there are set new records1 concerning the factorization of num-
                                           bers of certain size, mostly due to improved implementations of the best available
                                           algorithms and advances in the hardware and computing power. In addition, the
                                           bound for the deterministic integer factorization problem has been improved mul-
                                           tiple times in recent years ([11], [12], [10], [14]). On the other hand, there has
                                           only been little progress in the development of new techniques for practical integer

                                              2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 11A51,11Y05.
                                              SBA Research (SBA-K1) is a COMET Centre within the framework of COMET – Competence
                                           Centers for Excellent Technologies Programme and funded by BMK, BMDW, and the federal state
                                           of Vienna. The COMET Programme is managed by FFG.
                                              1
                                                A recent record was the factorization of a 250 decimal digit number in February 2020 by
                                           Boudot et al., see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_Factoring_Challenge
                                                                                            1
2                                      M. HITTMEIR


factorization since the invention of the Number Field Sieve ([19]) in the 1990s. One
of the earlier algorithms with sub-exponential runtime was by Dixon ([7]) in 1981.
From today’s perspective, it may be considered as a prototype for several other
algorithms. To this group belong the Continued Fraction factorization method
(CFRAC) described and implemented by Morrison and Brillhart ([24]) in 1975, the
Linear Sieve by Schroeppel and the Quadratic Sieve by Pomerance. The latter
author analyzed and compared these algorithms in 1982 in [25]. In general, there
is an extensive amount of literature on practical integer factorization algorithms.
The reader may find information on the mentioned methods and other factorization
techniques in the survey [18] and in the monographs [27] and [30]. These sources
also discuss a variety of factorization algorithms for numbers N that satisfy cer-
tain properties, or that have prime factors of certain shape. For example, Fermat’s
factorization method runs particularly fast if N has co-divisors that are very close,
while Pollard’s P − 1 technique and the Elliptic Curve Method (ECM) work par-
ticularly well for numbers with small prime factors. In the present paper, we are
interested in so-called general-purpose factorization algorithms, which means that
the runtime complexity estimate of the procedure only depends on the size of the
input number N . Both the Quadratic Sieve and the Number Field Sieve belong
to this group. From a practical point of view, the Quadratic Sieve (and its modi-
fications) is considered the best general-purpose factorization algorithm for N up
to around 100 digits, whereas the Number Field Sieve is faster for inputs beyond
that. While methods such as CFRAC and ECM stay somewhat competitive up to
a small input length (see [23]), factorization tools usually use ECM to rule out the
existence of relatively small prime factors, but then switch either to the Number
Field Sieve or to the Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve (SIQS), which is the fastest
modification of the original Quadratic Sieve algorithm.2
   Our contribution is the presentation and evaluation of a novel approach, Smooth
Subsum Search (SSS). Just like CFRAC, the Linear Sieve and the Quadratic Sieve,
SSS belongs to the group of Dixon-type algorithms. The core idea is based on
constructing smoothness candidates in a way that guarantees divisibility by many
primes, while keeping their values as small as possible. This is achieved by find-
ing collisions of affine transformations of the roots of the considered polynomial
modulo the primes in the factor base. The construction allows to quickly generate
values that have a high likelihood of being smooth without sieving the complete
interval for each prime of the factor base. In addition to a detailed explanation of
our algorithm, a discussion of its advantages compared to the Quadratic Sieve and
theoretical arguments for the runtime improvement, we will consider our current
implementation in Python and several experiments on the runtime complexity of
SSS. Our results demonstrate that SSS outperforms SIQS on semiprime3 numbers
with 30 to 100 decimal digits, finding smooth numbers around 5 to 7 times faster.
While these findings need to be corroborated in experiments with different imple-
mentations of SIQS in other programming languages, they indicate that SSS is the
fastest available factorization algorithm for general numbers in this range.
   2In its standard settings, the tool Msieve (https://sourceforge.net/projects/msieve/) uses
ECM for searching for small prime factors with up to 15 digits. Similarly, for numbers with 31
digits or more, the calculator of Dario Alpern (https://www.alpertron.com.ar) switches to SIQS
after a quick search for small factors via ECM.
   3
     Throughout the paper, we will use this term for numbers composed of two distinct prime
factors. Under certain conditions, such numbers are the most difficult to factorize.
                               SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                      3


   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we discuss the
Quadratic Sieve and its modifications in greater detail, together with an important
subroutine of our own algorithm. Section 3 presents the full algorithm SSS as it is
currently implemented. The results of our experiments can be found in Section 4,
where SSS is compared to the fastest implementations of the Quadratic Sieve in
Python. Section 5 explores three speculative ideas on how to construct further
variants and improvements of SSS. Finally, we summarize and give concluding
remarks in Section 6.

                                  2. Related Work
  Let N be the number we want to factorize. We will always assume that N is
odd, composite and not a perfect power of another number. The currently fastest
general-purpose factorization algorithm is the General Number Field Sieve with a
heuristic asymptotic runtime complexity of
                       p                                        
                  exp ( 3 64/9 + o(1))(log N )1/3 (log log N )2/3 .
For comparison, the heuristic asymptotic runtime complexity of the Quadratic Sieve
is exp (1 + o(1))(log N )1/2 (log log N )1/2 ([26]). The Number Field Sieve is signif-
icantly more complicated and harder to implement than the Quadratic Sieve. As
mentioned, the latter technique is also still faster in practice for factoring numbers
up to around 100 digits. We now restrict our attention to the technical details
of the Quadratic Sieve, as it is a suitable representative for the other Dixon-type
methods. In addition, it will be used as a benchmark for our own algorithm in the
experiments in Section 4.
   The ultimate goal of the Quadratic Sieve and the other Dixon-type algorithms
is to find two numbers X and Y such that X 2 ≡ Y 2 mod N . For such pairs, one
can easily show that there is a high chance that gcd(X − Y, N ) gives a nontrivial
divisor.
√           However, perfect squares are a rare occurrence. Since there are roughly
   N square numbers below N , simply picking random values for X and hoping for
X 2 (mod N ) to be square will take too long. So in order to find such X and Y ,
the first phase of all these algorithms tries to collect so-called smooth relations.
Such a relation is a congruence x2 ≡ y mod N such that the prime factorization
of y only consists of primes up to a certain bound B. In this case, the number y
is called B-smooth (or just smooth). Let p1 , . . . , pm be the primes up to B. The
set {p1 , . . . , pm } of these primes is referred to as factor base. The smooth relations
may then be written as x2 ≡ y = pe11 · · · pemm mod N for certain exponents ei ∈ N0 ,
i = 1, . . . , m. The first phase proceeds until enough of these relations are found,
which usually means a bit more than the number m of primes in the factor base.
As soon as this is the case, the second phase starts. Here, we want to find linear
dependencies in the exponent vectors (e1 , . . . , em ) of the smooth relations, i.e., a
subset of these vectors that sum to the 0-vector. We can use well-known methods
from linear algebra to identify such subsets and thereby find smooth relations that
can be multiplied to obtain a new congruence of the form
                                               m
                                                  e +e +···+ei,k
                                               Y
                           x21 x22 · · · x2k ≡   pi i,1 i,2      mod N,
                                    i=1
where ei,1 + ei,2 + · · · + ei,k ≡ 0 mod 2 for all i. As a consequence, there exists
                                  Qm e +e +···+ei,k
a number Y such that Y 2 = i=1 pi i,1 i,2             . Clearly, there also exists X
4                                     M. HITTMEIR


such that X 2 = x21 x22 · · · x2k , and we have found what we were looking for. One
important parameter of these factorization techniques is the smoothness bound B.
If B is very large, then it is easier to find smooth relations. On the other hand,
we need to find much more of them for the second phase to work. In addition, the
matrix in the linear algebra step will be very large. If B is rather small, then we
will most likely not be able to find enough smooth relations.
   The main difference between Dixon’s method, CFRAC, the Quadratic Sieve and
our algorithm SSS is in how the smooth relations are collected in the first phase.
Dixon’s algorithm chooses random values x and checks if x2 (mod N ) is√B-smooth.
CFRAC uses the convergents in the continued fraction expansion of N . While
the value of x2 (mod N ) in Dixon’s method is bounded by N , the main advantage
                                                                       2
of CFRAC over √ Dixon is that it generates congruences of the form x ≡ y mod N
with |y| ≤ 2 N , which increases the chances for y being smooth. In√the basic
version of the Quadratic Sieve, the values of the polynomial f (x) = (x+⌈ N ⌉)2 −N
are used as candidates for possibly smooth y. Note that
                                             √        √
(2.1)                y = f (x) = x2 + 2x⌈ N ⌉ + (⌈ N ⌉)2 − N,
which for small x gives a bound similar to the one obtained in CFRAC. The main
advantage of the Quadratic Sieve compared to CFRAC is in how we check the
smoothness of the candidates y. While CFRAC applies trial division or techniques
for smoothness detection of batches of numbers (see [1]), the Quadratic Sieve uses
sieving. The basic idea is as follows: Let again {p1 , . . . , pm } be the factor base F.
Our goal is to find arguments x such that f (x) is divisible by many primes in F.
We first remove all primes p from F for which Legendre’s symbol (N |p) = −1, since
N is a quadratic non-residue modulo such p and, thus, p cannot divide f (x) for any
value of x. Next, we use the well-known Tonelli-Shanks algorithm to compute the
solutions of f (x) ≡ 0 mod p for each remaining prime p in F. Note that
                              f (x + kp) ≡ f (x)    mod p
for every k ∈ Z. Hence, if f (x0 ) is divisible by p, so is f (x0 +kp) for every k ∈ Z. We
start the sieve by initializing an indexed array of pre-defined length L containing
zeros, where each index corresponds to an argument x. For each p ∈ F and each
x0 with f (x0 ) ≡ 0 mod p, we then raise the entries in the array at the indices
x0 + kp for k ∈ Z by ⌈log p⌉. At the end of the sieving, we check the array for
entries that are larger than a certain threshold, as for these it follows that f (x) is
divisible by a lot of primes in the factor base and thus likely to be smooth. Since
the information about the actual divisors of such f (x) is lost, we still need to apply
either trial division or some other factorization algorithm suitable for finding small
prime factors. However, the sieving procedure greatly reduces the total number of
such applications compared to what is needed in CFRAC.
   If we have not found enough smooth relations by applying the sieving procedure
above, we may continue by increasing the length L of the sieving array. However,
this will lead to the expression (2.1) getting quite large, which decreases the chances
of f (x) being smooth. The Multiple Polynomial Quadratic Sieve (MPQS) ([29]),
an improvement of the basic version of the quadratic sieve, makes use of multiple
polynomials fa,b (x) = (ax + b)2 − N with a, b ∈ Z. While switching to another
polynomial allows the use of a new array and thus solves the problem of increasing
values of the smoothness candidates, it is also somewhat expensive to initialize new
polynomials and compute the solutions of fa,b (x) ≡ 0 mod p for all the primes p in
                              SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                    5


the factor base. A remedy for this problem has been found in another improvement,
the already mentioned Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve (SIQS) [3]. The idea is to
choose a as a product of primes in the factor base, and b such that b2 − N = ac
for some c ∈ Z. Then fa,b (x) = a(ax2 + bx + c), so fa,b (x) is smooth if and only
if ax2 + bx + c is smooth. In addition, there are several different possible choices b
for each choice of a that may be computed via the Chinese Remainder Theorem.
The corresponding solutions to fa,b (x) ≡ 0 mod p for each prime p are related in
a way that allows to change to a new polynomial much more easily. In particular,
the expensive inversion of elements modulo the primes p only needs to be done once
for every choice of a.
    One further improvement that may be applied to all Dixon-type algorithms is
the so-called large prime variant ([2]). If we have found a relation x2 ≡ y mod N
where y is partially smooth, meaning that the divisor r in its factorization that
is not smooth is comparably small, then we may also save this so-called partial
relation. As soon as we find two partial relations of the form
                                 x21 ≡ y1 · r   mod N
                                 x22 ≡ y2 · r   mod N
where y1 and y2 are smooth, we may combine them to get a full relation, namely
(r−1 )2 x21 x22 ≡ y1 y2 mod N . This improvement can speed up the search for smooth
relations by about a factor of 2.
   Finally, let us briefly discuss the smoothness detection algorithm by Bernstein
that has already been mentioned in the context of CFRAC. For cases where siev-
ing the values of a polynomial in the described sense is not an option, Bernstein
describes another way to find smooth and partially smooth numbers in a given set.
As mentioned in the abstract, SSS is not based on sieving. In Section 3, we will
use the following procedure ([1, Algorithm 2.1]) instead. Let F = {p1 , . . . , pm } be
the factor base and C = {x1 , . . . , xn } be a set of positive integers.

smooth batch(F, C)
 1: Compute z = p1 · · · pm using a product tree.
 2: Compute z (mod x1 ), . . . , z (mod xm ) using a remainder tree.
                                                    e
 3: For k = 1, . . . , n, compute yk = (z (mod xk ))2(mod xk ) using repeated squar-
                                                                  e
    ing. Here, e is the smallest nonnegative integer such that 22 ≥ xk .
 4: For k = 1, . . . , n, print xk / gcd(xk , yk ).


   The algorithm outputs the part of the factorization of each xk that is not smooth.
For more information on smooth detection as well as on product and remainder
trees, see [6, Section 3.3]. We now move on to the presentation of SSS.

                           3. Smooth Subsum Search
   Let us consider an integer polynomial f : Z → Z and a factor base F of primes
smaller than some bound B. The task is to find x ∈ Z such that f (x) is B-smooth.
In Section 2, we have discussed
                         √       the Quadratic Sieve for solving this problem for the
polynomial f (x) = (x+⌈ N ⌉)2 −N in order to factor the number N . The algorithm
presented in this section solves the same problem on the same polynomial, but uses
a heuristic search approach instead of sieving.
6                                                M. HITTMEIR


3.1. The core idea. We start by discussing a suitable representation of the possi-
ble solutions x. We will see that this representation already restricts our attention to
values x with increased likelihood of f (x) being smooth. We are looking for prefer-
ably small values x such that f (x) is divisible by several (powers of) the primes
in F. Let p1 , p2 , . . . , pm be the odd primes in F, and assume that (N |pi ) = 1 for
i = 1, . . . , m. Then, the congruence f (x) ≡ 0 mod pi has two solutions si,1 , si,2 .
Using the Chinese Remainder Theorem, we may easily compute those x for which
f (x) is divisible by specific primes in F in form of sums (see get x below). Namely,
with xi ∈ {0, 1, 2}, we represent the candidates x via vectors
                                        x=
                                         b (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ).
If xi > 0, we fix the value of x (mod pi ) = si,xi and thereby make sure that
f (x) ≡ 0 mod pi holds. If xi = 0, we leave the value of x (mod pi ) undefined, and
it will ultimately be determined by the other values in the vector that we did fix.
Of course we would like f (x) to be divisible by as many primes in F as possible.
However, if we run the Chinese Remainder Theorem on vectors (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm )
where most of the xi are nonzero, then the modulus M , i.e. the product of the
primes pi for which x (mod pi ) is fixed, will be very large, and so will be the
average values of the resulting sums x. The chances for f (x) being smooth are then
rather small. From this observation, it becomes quite clear that we would like to
keep |x|/M as small as possible in order to increase our chances for finding smooth
numbers. What we are looking for are sparse solution vectors leading to small
subsums x. We therefore restrict our attention to a subset S of the smaller primes
in F and, for generating a random solution, select only a few primes in S for which
the corresponding value xi is nonzero. We call S the small factor base. Assume
that there are n primes in S, i.e., let S = {p1 , . . . , pn }. Then xi = 0 for i > n
in all considered representations (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ), and we may just denote them by
(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ). Here is our function for retrieving the value x that corresponds to
the representations (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) by applying the Chinese Remainder Theorem.

get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn )
                         Q
 1: Compute M =              i: xi ̸=0 pi .
 2: Return
                                            X M ci
                                 x :=              · si,xi     (mod M ),
                                               pi
                                     i: xi ̸=0
    where ci = (M/pi )−1 (mod pi ).

   Assume that we have constructed a pair (x, M ) as above. We may choose x in
the range {−⌈M/2⌉, . . . , ⌊M/2⌋} to keep |x|/M as small as possible. Then we have
                                                                           √
                     2
                             √        √      2              M      √      2 N +1
(3.1) |f (x)|/M = |(x + 2x⌈ N ⌉ + (⌈ N ⌉) − N )|/M ≪            + ⌈ N⌉ +
                                                             4               M
as the worst-case upper bound for our smoothness candidates. That is quite good
and, assuming a reasonable size of M , on average quite a bit smaller than the
smoothness candidates obtained in the Quadratic Sieve     √ (see (2.1)). In practice,
many of these candidates will actually be slightly below N . However, the average
number of different pairs (x, M ) we would have to test for smoothness until find-
ing a smooth relation is still substantial, particularly for inputs with 60 digits or
                              SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                    7


more. We may apply the smooth batch procedure (see Section 2) to test a lot of
candidates at once. Still, for large enough numbers, the advantage of fast sieving
will outweigh the advantage of slightly smaller smoothness candidates.
   Luckily, we can do better than that. Again, what we want is to efficiently
construct pairs (x, M ) such that M divides f (x) and |x|/M is as small as possible.
Let us start with a random pair (x, M ) as constructed above. We now consider the
values xj = x + jM for small values j ∈ Z. It is clear that M | f (xj ) for all j.
What we are looking for are values j for which we know that f (xj ) will be divisible
not only by M , but also by larger primes in the factor base, i.e., primes in F\S. In
order to find such values, we compute
(3.2)   r1 := (si,1 − x) · M −1   (mod pi ) and r2 := (si,2 − x) · M −1   (mod pi )
for all pi ∈ F \S. It is easy to see that r1 and r2 are the residues of those values
j ∈ Z for which pi | f (xj ). We also compute r1 − pi and r2 − pi , and store these
values in a list. Having finished the computation of these lists for all primes in
F\S, the next step is to search for collisions, i.e., values that occur in more than
one list, for different primes. Assume that α occurs in the lists of the primes p,
q and r, then M pqr | f (xα ). We hence define a new candidate pair (xα , M pqr).
Assume that r is the largest of the three primes. Then |α| < r, and we have
                                                √          √
 |f (xα )|/(M pqr) = |((x + M α)2 + 2(x + M α)⌈ N ⌉ + (⌈ N ⌉)2 − N )|/(M pqr)
                                                    √          √
                   < |((M (α + 1))2 + 2(M (α + 1))⌈ N ⌉ + (⌈ N ⌉)2 − N )|/(M pqr)
                               √        √
                      M r 2⌈ N ⌉ 2 N + 1
                   ≪       +         +           .
                       pq      pq        M pqr
Compared to (2.1) and (3.1), this value is significantly smaller, improving the chance
for it to factorize completely over the remaining primes in S. In addition, it may
also still be divisible by smaller primes in F\S whose residues in the computed lists
are not equal, but congruent to α. The current implementation of SSS is built for
the task of quickly generating candidate pairs (x, M ) of the described form. M is
composed of the product M of several small primes in S and at least three large
primes in F\S, and x is of the form x + M α for suitable α ∈ Z. Having collected
a certain number of these pairs, we apply the smooth batch procedure with a
substantially increased chance of finding smooth relations.
    The core idea of SSS is the search for suitable smoothness candidates by looking
for collisions instead of sieving. In Section 3.2, we discuss our current implemen-
tation in greater detail. There are a few things that we do differently than in the
explanation above. For example, we do not really need to keep track of the large
primes in F\S that divide f (x). It is enough to know that they exist. So we may
simply store the residues r1 , r1 − pi , r2 , r2 − pi in a hash table or dictionary and
count them directly as they are computed. All we need are the resulting values α
and their counts, since we are only interested in those values whose count exceed a
certain threshold, e.g. 3. The information about which primes divide the resulting
f (xα ) is lost, but we do not need it until the linear algebra step.
    Another implementation detail concerns the computation of the residues r1 and
r2 , particularly the inversion of M modulo the primes in F\S. This is a quite
expensive step and similar to switching to another polynomial in MPQS or SIQS.
However, we have found a remedy for this problem that will also be explained in
the course of the following subsection.
8                                         M. HITTMEIR


                     Table 1. Choice of factor base sizes m and n

                                    Digits      m        n
                                       ≤ 18     60       12
                                    19 − 25     150      30
                                    26 − 34     200      40
                                    35 − 36     300      60
                                    37 − 38     400      80
                                    39 − 40     500      100
                                    41 − 42     600      120
                                    43 − 44     700      140
                                    45 − 48     1000     200
                                    49 − 52     1200     240
                                    53 − 56     2000     400
                                    57 − 60     4000     800
                                    61 − 66     6000     1200
                                    67 − 74     10000    2000
                                    78 − 80     30000    6000
                                    81 − 88     50000    10000
                                    89 − 94     60000    12000
                                    95 − 100    100000   20000




3.2. Current implementation. Let us now discuss our implementation4 and the
used parameters. For the sizes m and n of the factor base F and the small factor
base S, we aim5 at the values given in Table 1. Here, m is chosen similarly as for
SIQS in various factorization tools. In particular, the choices for m between 26 and
100 digits are taken from the source code of the primefac package in Python, which
uses similar parameters as Msieve v1.52 and is one of the implementations used in
our experiments in Section 4. In order to find a good choice for n, which is a new
parameter in our algorithm, we conducted a number of experiments. In the end,
n = m/5 showed satisfying results.
   Let us start by discussing the precomputations that we conduct prior to our
main loop for finding smooth relations.
      (i) Compute the factor base F and small factor base S.
     (ii) Compute the roots of f modulo pi for the odd primes pi in F.
    (iii) Compute a product tree of F as preparation for smooth batch6 (see Sec-
          tion 2).
    (iv) We want to avoid the inversion in the coefficients ci = (M/pi )−1 (mod pi )
          used in Step 2 of the function get x. Let µ be the product of all primes in
          S and let γi := (µ/pi )−1 (mod pi ). Then it is easy to check that, for every
          M | µ and every i = 1, . . . , n, we have
                                    µγi   M ci
                                        ≡            mod M.
                                     pi    pi
         We hence precompute the global coefficients Λi := (µγi )/pi for i = 1, . . . , n
         once and may then use them in the main loop, even though the modulus
         M is constantly changing.

    4Repository: https://github.com/sbaresearch/smoothsubsumsearch
   5Our implementation considers the first 2m primes for F and then removes those p with
(N |p) = −1 from the factor bases. Since N is a quadratic non-residue for about half of these
primes, this leads to slightly varying, but overall similar cardinalities as those given in Table 1.
   6We modified the code from https://facthacks.cr.yp.to for our implementation.
                                       SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                                   9


     (v) In Step (ii), we computed the roots {si,1 , si,2 } of f modulo the odd primes
         in the small factor base S. In addition, we also compute the differences
                                        ∆i := Λi · (si,2 − si,1 ).
        If we then want to switch from a solution x =              b (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , 1, xi+1 , . . . , xn )
        to the solution (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , 2, xi+1 , . . . , xn ) or vice versa, we may easily do
        that by computing (x + ∆i ) (mod M ) or (x − ∆i ) (mod M ), respectively.
Equipped with the quantities Λi and ∆i , we may now move on to the core of the
SSS algorithm, which is the search function. This function runs in a repeated loop
until we have found enough smooth relations. Let R and P be the sets in which
we save full and partial relations, respectively.

search(k, R, P)
 1: Choose k random indices in {1, . . . , n} and store them in a set I.
 2: Compute the list M of all primes pi ∈ S with i ∈ I, and their product M .
 3: Compute the inverses µp := M −1 (mod p) for all p ∈ F\S.
 4: For i = 1, . . . , n, let xi = 1 if i ∈ I, and set xi = 0 otherwise.     Compute
    x := get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ).
 5: for i ∈ I do
 6:    Update x ← (x + ∆i ) (mod M ) and initialize a list B.
 7:    for p ∈ F\S do
 8:        Compute rk := (sk − x) · µp (mod p) for the roots s1 , s2 of f (mod p).
 9:        Add (p, r1 , r2 ) to B.
10:    Initialize a set of candidates C = ∅.
11:    for each prime q ∈ M do
12:        If q = pi , continue
13:        Compute m := M/q and initialize a list K.
14:        for p ∈ F\S do
15:            Compute αk := q · rk (mod p) for k = 1, 2, where (p, r1 , r2 ) ∈ B.
16:            Add α1 , α1 − p, α2 , α2 − p to K.
17:        for each α ∈ K that occurs at least three times do
18:            Compute x := x + αm and add f (x)/m to C.
19:    Run smooth batch(F, C). Let g1 , . . . , gℓ be the returned values.
20:    for i = 1, . . . , ℓ do
21:        If gi = 1, add the corresponding x to R.
22:        If 1 < gi < 128 · pm , add (x, gi ) with the corresponding x to P.


   The parameter k in the search function and the size n of the small factor base
together have a direct impact on the average magnitude of the values M . Similarly
to our approach for choosing n, we have conducted a number of experiments to
derive a suitable choice for k. In the current implementation, we are using k = 6.
In Step 3, we then compute all inverses of M modulo the primes in F\S. As already
mentioned in the end of the last subsection, we have found a way to only have to
do this once for every full loop of search. In the application of get x in Step 4, we
use the precomputed values Λi . Here, we are starting with the solution (x1 , . . . , xn )
that consists of only 0’s and 1’s. The remainder of the algorithm is a large for-loop.
In Step 6, we make sure that we are considering a different value for x in each run.
10                                       M. HITTMEIR


By adding ∆i to the previously used x, we exchange the corresponding 1 in the
solution vector by a 2, which avoids redundancies in the found relations. The Steps
6 to 9 compute the transformations r1 and r2 (see (3.2)) of the roots of f (mod p)
for p ∈ F\S. Instead of checking for collisions7 as discussed in Section 3.1 and
moving on to the next i ∈ I, we save the values for later usage in the inner loop,
starting at Step 11. In this loop, we are performing the search for collisions not for
our initial candidate pair (x, M ), but for the candidate pairs (x, M/q) for all primes
q dividing M . Using the values in the precomputed list B, Step 15 computes the
respective transformation of the roots of f (mod p) much more efficiently. Namely,
we have
                (sk − x) · (M/q)−1 ≡ (sk − x) · µp · q ≡ q · rk mod p.
So the values for the list K that we want to check for collisions may be computed
by simple multiplications of two small numbers q and rk modulo p. This makes
the method much more efficient than if we would have to compute inverses in the
innermost loop.
    Step 12 removes a redundancy in the computation, as the change applied to x
in Step 6 does not affect the values of x (mod M/q) in the case where q = pi . In
Step 17, we need to find those α that occur more than three times in K. There are
many different ways to achieve this, from counting the values on the fly in Step 15
to hash tables and dictionaries8. Finally, we apply smooth batch to C and check
if the resulting non-smooth parts of any of the candidates equals 1, in which case
we have found a full relation, or is smaller than 128 · pm , in which case we have
found a partial relation (see Section 2).
    The Steps 1 to 4 may be considered as a global search, in which we end up with
an initial candidate pair (x, M ). The large for-loop spanning from Step 5 to Step
22 may be considered as a local search, in which we refine the initial candidate pair
and obtain arguments x with a higher probability of leading to smooth values f (x).
We note that, after the random choice of indices in the global search in Step 1, the
local search and the remainder of the algorithm are fully deterministic. We have
to repeat the function search(k, R, P) until we have found enough full and partial
relations. As soon as this is the case, we proceed to the linear algebra stage of the
algorithm, which is the same as for other Dixon-type algorithms. In addition to
the potential optimizations that will be described in Section 5.4, there are minor
tweaks and variations of the algorithm that make it run a bit faster. Let us discuss
two of them:
                                                          √
     (1) Using a different polynomial than f (x) = (x+⌈ N ⌉)2 −N . While SSS does
         not really gain anything by changing polynomials during the algorithm like
         in SIQS, the search seems to run faster for certain√ polynomials compared
         to others. In particular, consider fγ (x) = (x + ⌈ γN ⌉)2 − γN for small
         choices of γ ∈ N. A well-known approach for finding a good choice of γ is
         the Knuth-Schroeppel function ([29, p.335]). However, we have not used
         this improvement in the experiments in Section 4.
     (2) Let η be the product of all primes in F, which is computed in the product
         tree during the initialization (see Step (iii) of the precomputation steps).
   7In our actual implementation, we also use r and r from Step 8 for finding collisions. We have
                                               1     2
omitted it here because it would have made the description of search unnecessarily complicated.
   8In Python, we may use the Counter method from the Python Standard Library collections
(https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.Counter).
                              SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                   11


        Before starting the search loop, we multiply η by powers of the primes in
        the factor base until each prime power dividing η is larger than 215 . This
        allows to reduce the exponent e in Step 3 of smooth batch. In fact, our
        implementation does not run Step 3 at all. We might miss a few smooth
        relations, but the runtime savings due to the omitted repeated squarings
        make up for that. In slightly different form, this improvement is already
        mentioned in Bernstein’s original paper on the smooth-batch algorithm. In
        fact, a long list of other ideas for speedups of the procedure can be found
        in [1, Section 3], so we suspect that there is room for further improvement.
3.3. Comparison to SIQS. Let us now compare SSS to the Quadratic Sieve,
and in particular to the self-initializing version SIQS that has been described in
Section 2. In the experiments in Section 4, we will see that SSS is consistently
faster than SIQS by a factor between 5 and 7. While it does not appear feasible
to rigorously prove a runtime improvement by a constant between such complex
procedures, we will consider some arguments that provide theoretical and heuristical
plausibility for the improvement by the observed factor.
   Starting with the similarities, the Steps 1 to 9 in search are rather close to
what happens in SIQS when a new polynomial fa,b is chosen. Our choices of M
and x resemble the choices of a and b, and the computation of the values rk in
Step 8 corresponds to the computation of the roots of fa,b modulo the primes in
F\S. While SIQS conducts these computations modulo the complete factor base
F, we restrict our attention to F\S. There are also differences in how we choose
M compared to how a is typically chosen. Nevertheless, the setup and preparations
for what happens later in both algorithms are somewhat similar, and it seems fair
to assume that there are no major deviations in the runtimes of these parts of the
techniques. The main structural difference is in the Steps 10 to 22 of search. In
particular, we find our smoothness candidates by searching for collisions in the list
K, while SIQS uses a sieving procedure on an interval of certain length 2L. We
will now compare the two approaches for finding suitable candidates x + αM with
|α| bounded by pn , the largest prime in the small factor base S. For the sake of
simplicity, let us consider just the positive interval [0, pn ]. In SIQS, we sieve this
interval in the manner described in Section 2, which takes around
                         X                    X
                      2·    ⌈pn /p⌉ ≥ 2 · (pn    1/p + |F| − |S|)
                        p∈F                  p∈S

operations. The factor 2 comes from the fact that we have to do this two times,
once for each root modulo each prime. In SSS, we have to compute the values αk in
Step 15, which are two operations (one for each root) per prime in F\S. Overall,
this makes
                                  2 · (|F| − |S|)
operations. One can now compare these two terms asymptotically and numerically.
Asymptotically, the Prime Number Theorem implies that the SIQS term is around
O(pn log log pn ) and that the SSS term is around O(pm / log pm ), where pm is the
largest prime in the factor base. So one would expect that, numerically, the differ-
ence between the two quantities grows larger. We verified this by computing the
terms for a few examples. For inputs with around 30-70 digits, the SIQS term was
usually about 3 to 8 times larger than the SSS term. For inputs with 75-100 digits,
it was usually about 8 to 13 times larger.
12                                      M. HITTMEIR


   Of course, this is not the complete picture. One might argue that the sieving
operations in SIQS are fixed-precision additions, whereas the main operations in
SSS are multiplications modulo the primes in F\S. While that is true, we point
out that SIQS has to compute new roots of the polynomials every time it starts
with a new interval, and this happens also by performing multiplications modulo
the primes in the factor base. SIQS then proceeds with the sieving step. SSS, on
the other hand, does nothing else but computing the multiplications. It basically
omits the sieving step.
   Another objection might be that SIQS finds (almost) all candidates of the form
x + αM with α < pn that lead to smooth relations, while SSS only finds those for
which the corresponding y-value has at least three prime factors in F\S. However,
it appears that the number of relations satisfying this condition is quite large. If
anything, it may make sense to further strengthen the condition, not weaken it.
Depending on the set threshold in the sieving process, the resulting candidates in
SIQS will have a high likelihood of leading to either full or partial relations. The
condition of having at least three large prime divisors in SSS leads to more “false
positives” that have to be tested and rejected in the smooth-batch procedure. This
fact becomes more important for larger inputs with 70 digits or more (see Figure 2
in Section 4), where the higher cost of the smooth-batch procedure in SSS partially
compensates the growing amount of operations in SIQS mentioned above.
   We now want to stress a few additional aspects that work to the favor of SSS.
     (1) Working modulo M/q for the different prime factors q of M in the inner-
         most loop allows us to switch to a new search domain with essentially zero
         cost. SSS focuses on relatively small values for α, particularly those in
         the interval [−pn , pn ]. SIQS has to sieve a larger interval of length 2L for
         each polynomial to reduce the cost resulting from switching between poly-
         nomials9. The probability of finding smooth relations decreases sharply for
         growing values of α.
     (2) Quite regularly, SSS will find smooth relations from α’s with absolute value
         larger than pn . If three or more of the larger primes in F\S divide a
         candidate value, and the corresponding residue is larger than pn , this will
         also be detected.
     (3) SSS is arguably simpler than SIQS. Its core functions can be implemented
         in around 100 lines of code, and the results on smaller numbers show that
         there appears to be a lower amount of computational overhead.
With all this in mind, the results of our experiments (an improvement by a factor
of around 10 for 30-40 digits, and by a factor of 5 to 7 for 45-100 digits) might
be explained as follows: For smaller numbers (30-70 digits), the improvement is
a combination of a reduced amount of overhead together with a reduced factor of
around 3 to 8 of main SSS operations compared to main SIQS operations. For
larger numbers, the improvement is a result of a smaller average size of α and a
reduced factor of around 8 to 13 of main SSS operations compared to main SIQS
operations. With increased input size, the smooth-batch procedure for detecting
false positives becomes a bottleneck in SSS, which compensates these effects to
some extent. Overall, this leads to a consistent improvement by a factor of around
5 to 7.
    9For instance, consider inputs with 60 digits. Then p is around 14000, while a usual choice
                                                         n
for L for inputs of this size is 196608.
                                SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                13


   As initially mentioned, this subsection is not considered to be a rigorous proof of
the observed runtime reduction. There are several factors that cannot be considered
in full detail here, such as particular nuances of the implementations. However, we
hope to have made a convincing case for the plausibility of the improvement.
3.4. SSSf: A filter for smoothness candidates. We have said that the smooth-
batch procedure gets more expensive as the input number grows and smooth rela-
tions become rare. In practical terms, this becomes noticeable on inputs N with
about 70 digits or more. Before presenting our experiments, we propose an improve-
ment that works like a filter for the candidates in C in Step 19 of search. Prior
to applying smooth batch with the complete factor base F, we apply it with a
subset of its smallest primes. To be more concrete, we split up F into two disjoint
subsets F1 and F2 . F1 contains the smallest primes in F such that ρ = |F|/|F1 | for
some preset proportion ρ, and F2 contains all remaining primes. We then replace
Step 19 in search by the following procedure.

smooth filter(F1 , F2 , C, δ)
 1: Initialize Cf = ∅
 2: Run smooth batch(F1 , C). Let g1 , . . . , gℓ be the returned values.
 3: for i = 1, . . . , ℓ do
 4:     If gi < 10d/2−δ for the number d of decimal digits of N , add gi to Cf .
 5: Run smooth batch(F2 , Cf ) and proceed with Step 20 of search.


   The main goal of smooth filter is to reduce the number of candidates that have
to be checked in the smooth-batch procedure for divisibility by the complete factor
base. In order to achieve that, we first apply smooth batch(F1 , C) to check for
divisibility by the smallest √
                             primes. If the resulting non-smooth part of a gi is not
significantly smaller than ⌈ N ⌉ in Step 4, we directly discard this candidate.
   We denote SSS applied with this modification by SSSf. While SSSf is in fact
slower than SSS for inputs N with up to around 70 digits, it shows an improved
performance on inputs with 75-100 digits. Besides the already discussed parameters
m, n and k, SSSf comes with two additional parameters ρ and δ. In our current
implementation, we are using ρ = 10 and δ = 5. In addition, we are using k = 7
instead of the choice of k = 6 we have used in SSS. However, these values may not be
optimal, and it certainly makes sense to conduct more experiments for fine-tuning
them with regards to the size of the input number.

                                  4. Experiments
   The approach described in Section 3 has been implemented in the program-
ming language Python, a freely available high-level language that emphasizes code
readability. The reader may therefore easily reproduce all experimental results pre-
sented in this section. On the other hand, Python is considerably slower than other
programming languages (e.g. C), which restricted the size of the input numbers N
we could factorize in our experiments. In the range from 30 to 70 decimal digits, it
was possible to perform full factorization tests on random semiprimes. For larger
inputs ranging from 75 to 100 digits, this would have taken too much time. For
such numbers, we stopped the algorithms after one hour and compared the amount
of smooth relations that have been found during this time. Due to this limitation,
14                                     M. HITTMEIR


there is a factor of randomness involved, particularly for the results on inputs with
90 to 100 digits. However, it allows us to observe a general tendency of the runtime
of the algorithms and their development for growing input numbers.
   In order to compare SSS to SIQS, we have used currently available implemen-
tations of SIQS in Python libraries. The first we found is a recent implementa-
tion in sympy 10, a well-known and widely used library for symbolic mathematics.
The second implementation we found is part of primefac 11, a package focused on
primality tests and integer factorization. It is noted in the documentation that
their SIQS implementation is taken mostly verbatim from another package, Py-
Factorise 12. While we have found other implementations of the (Self-initializing)
Quadratic Sieve in Python, these two were most refined and competitive in our
experiments. Throughout the section, we will denote sympy’s implementation by
sSIQS and the implementation by primefac/PyFactorise by pSIQS. With regards
to the comparability of the approaches, we point out the following.
      • We have applied all three implementations with the same code for the sec-
         ond phase (the linear algebra stage13) to make sure that any runtime dif-
         ferences only result from the performance in the first phase, where smooth
         relations are collected. We utilized a Gaussian elimination algorithm over
         F2 as it is implemented in primefac. The approach is based on [17].
      • For all approaches, we used a factor base size m of F close to the values in
         Table 1. For the length L of the sieved intervals in the SIQS implementa-
         tions, we used the standard settings given in the source code of pSIQS.
      • Both sSIQS and pSIQS do not use the Knuth-Schroeppel function to find a
         suitable multiplier γ for N . As already discussed at the end of Section 3.2,
         we also did not make use of this improvement.
      • In pSIQS, the large prime variant (see end of Section 2) is not implemented.
         This has to be kept in mind when considering the results, and is also the
         reason why we did not run pSIQS on inputs with 55 digits or more.
      • We used SSS with the bound 128 · pm for saving partial relations (see Step
         22 of search). The same bound is used in sSIQS.
Let us now discuss our experimental setup. We consider input numbers N with
d = 30, 35, 40, . . . , 95, 100 digits. For each of these input sizes, we did the following.
    (1) Generate a random semiprime N with d digits, such that its two prime
         factors are about the same size.
    (2) Apply sSIQS to factorize N . If d ≤ 50, apply pSIQS to factorize N .
    (3) If d ≤ 70, apply SSS to N . For d = 75, 80, 85, 90, 95, 100, apply SSSf to N .
Let us start with the results14 for 30 ≤ d ≤ 70. Due to the increase in general time
complexity, we consider 20 different inputs N for d ∈ {30, 35, 40}, 10 different N
for d ∈ {45, 50, 55}, five different N for d = 60 and three different N for d = 65, 70.
After we have finished all runs for a certain d, we computed the mean and the
standard deviation of the runtimes of all methods. The results can be found in
Table 2, and the mean runtimes are visualized in Figure 1 in form of line plots.
     10https://docs.sympy.org/latest/modules/ntheory.html
     11
     https://pypi.org/project/primefac/
     12
     https://github.com/skollmann/PyFactorise
   13In general, this stage contributes only a tiny fraction to the complete runtime.
   14All computations have been conducted on a standard laptop with AMD Ryzen 7 5800H
processor (8-core 3.2 GHz) and 16GB RAM.
                               SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                               15


            Table 2. Runtime complexity in seconds: Mean ± STD
         Last column displays improvement factor of SSS over the fastest
                                 SIQS method

         #Digits SSS                sSIQS               pSIQS
         30        0.17±0.06        3.54±2.51           2.25±1.33       13.2
         35        0.67±0.27        5.72±2.24           10.95±6.98      8.5
         40        2.01±0.64        20.41±5.72          24.19±12.26     10.2
         45        7.16±2.85        40.20±17.21         61.71±40.66   5.6
         50        31.76±13.04      172.35±55.96        505.34±282.97 5.4
         55        81.64±32.94      451.13±162.42       –             5.5
         60        208.35±32.67   1352.57±176.28   –                    6.5
         65        740.12±120.89 4456.17±984.49    –                    6.0
         70        3157.13±252.08 16578.18±1532.10 –                    5.3




           (a) 30 to 40 digits                          (b) 45 to 55 digits




                                  (c) 60 to 70 digits

        Figure 1. Mean runtime complexity results as shown in Table 2

   For inputs with 30 − 40 digits, SSS is between 8.5 and 13.2 times faster than the
SIQS approaches. For inputs with 45 − 70 digits, the improvement factor is in the
range between 5.3 and 6.5. sSIQS and pSIQS behave somewhat similar for integers
with 30 to 45 digits. For inputs with 50 digits and higher, it becomes increasingly
noticeable that pSIQS does not make use of the large prime variant. Hence, we did
not consider it in our experiments on numbers with 55 to 70 digits.
16                                  M. HITTMEIR


   Let us now discuss the results for inputs with 75 to 100 digits. For each d in
this range, we conducted experiments on two different numbers N . For each N ,
we applied SSSf (see Section 3.4) and sSIQS and let them run for one hour each.
Finally, we compared the number of found relations during this time. The results
are in Table 3.

           Table 3. Found relations after 3600 seconds: Mean ± STD
           Last column displays improvement factor of SSSf over sSIQS

                    #Digits SSSf               sSIQS
                    75        12737.5±2677.5 1880.0±363.0 6.8
                    80        5544.5±1102.5 920.5±146.5 6.0
                    85        1790.5±539.5   350.0±100.0 5.1
                    90        538.5±36.5       86.0±16.0      6.3
                    95        356.0±4.0        64.5±5.5       5.5
                    100       139.0±51.0       25.0±5.0       5.6


   We can see that SSSf finds between 5.1 and 6.8 times as many smooth relations
as sSIQS in the same time. As already mentioned, these are by no means large
scale experiments, and there is a certain amount of variance involved in the specific
numbers of the table. Looking at general tendencies, however, we point out that
the factors in the last column are astonishingly similar to the results we got for
numbers with 45 to 70 digits in Table 2. In particular, there appears to be no
substantial decrease of the advantage of SSSf over sSIQS for larger inputs.
   With regards to the setup of this experiment, one should mention that the num-
ber of found relations in SSS, SSSf and SIQS is not uniformly distributed over time.
In the later stages of the process, the methods are more likely to connect two par-
tial relations to a full relation and thereby, on average, find more smooth numbers
compared to the beginning of the process. However, this is something that affects
both SSSf and sSIQS in the same manner. As a consequence, it seems reasonable
to conclude from these results that SSSf would finish the factorization of numbers
with 75-100 digits around 5 to 7 times faster than sSIQS.

   Finally, let us consider the cardinality of the candidate set C to which we apply
smooth batch in Step 19 of search. In Section 3.3, we have already talked about
the number of false positives in SSS. While this number is rather small for inputs
with 55 digits or less, it starts to increase for inputs with more than 65-70 digits.
In Figure 2, a histogram shows the average size of C for inputs with 60, 70, 80 and
90 digits. We can see that the cardinality of C is between 1000 and 2000 for inputs
with 80 to 90 digits. This is still a very small amount compared to the length of the
search domain, but it constitutes an additional amount of work in smooth batch
that, in this form, is not necessary in SIQS. There, the number of elements that
survive the sieving is comparably small, and so is the cost for processing them, i.e.,
checking whether they lead to full or partial relations.
   One solution for mitigating the additional cost is to change our condition for
including elements in C. For example, we could increase the number of large primes
in F\S that have to divide our candidates from 3 to 4. Indeed, this tends to
drastically reduce the size of C to a two-digit number. However, it also reduces
                              SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                    17




        Figure 2. Number of average elements in C in Step 19 of search.
        We compare the size of C in SSS with the size of the filtered set Cf
        of candidates in in smooth filter of SSSf.

the number of found relations and appears to lead to an overall slower algorithm.
A much better solution is the application of SSSf as presented in Section 3.4. We
first apply the smooth-batch procedure to all candidates in C, but only modulo a
fraction (e.g. 1/10) of the factor base. This is far less expensive and allows us
to discard a lot of less-promising candidates that are not small enough afterwards.
Figure 2 shows that this filter is very effective in reducing the number of elements
to which we have to apply the smooth-batch procedure modulo the complete factor
base. While these steps are still more work compared to what we have to do in
SIQS, it only appears to equalize the growing factor of increased main operations
(see Section 3.3) in SIQS compared to the main operations in SSS(f) for inputs
with 75-100 digits, and we still achieve an improvement by a factor of 5 to 7.

                             5. Other Ideas for SSS
   Our chances of finding smooth numbers with SSS depend on the ratio of the
solution x and considered modulus M . The size of x directly affects the size of the
considered candidate f (x), while M divides f (x) by definition and is a factor that
is always smooth for all considered candidates. As a result, we would like to make
x as small and M as large as possible. For a moment, let us forget about what we
are doing in our current implementation, and consider the following three possible
approaches for solving this problem:
     (1) For a fixed modulus M , try to find a related representation (x1 , . . . , xn )
         such that the value x returned by get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is minimized.
     (2) For a fixed value x, try to find divisors m dividing M such that the ratio
         (x (mod m))/m is minimized.
     (3) Use a different search technique to optimize both parameters at once by
         minimizing the objective function
                                      ψ = |x|/M.
18                                     M. HITTMEIR


Section 5.1, Section 5.2 and Section 5.3 refer to these approaches respectively. Be-
sides some proof-of-concept experiments, the described ideas have not been imple-
mented yet. Testing their applicability to possibly improve SSS is a subject for
future research. Section 5.4 discusses some minor speedups of our current code.

5.1. Lattice Reduction. We start with the approach of fixing M and finding
a suitable subsum, i.e., a corresponding representation (x1 , . . . , xn ) such that x
returned by get x(x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is minimized. Let M = ρ1 . . . ρk , where the ρi are
primes in our factor base or powers of such primes. For γi := (M/ρi )−1 (mod ρi )
and Mi := M γi /ρi , we may write the possible values x returned by get x as
(5.1)               s1,j1 M1 + s2,j2 M2 + . . . + sk,jk Mk     (mod M ),
where si,ji are solutions of f (x) ≡ 0 (mod ρi ). Our ultimate goal is to find the
choice of (s1,j1 , . . . , sk,jk ) for which the value of (5.1) is minimized.
   In principle, this problem is a modular version of the multiple choice subset-sum
problem (MCSS), which is discussed in [16, Sec. 11.10.1]. We consider k classes
Ni := {si,ji Mi (mod M ) : f (si,ji ) ≡ 0 (mod ρi )}, and the elements of the classes
are called weights. Denoting our weights as ωi,ji := si,ji Mi (mod M ), our goal is
to minimize the sum ω1,j1 + · · · + ωk,jk (mod M ). While MCSS is NP-complete,
there are multiple ways to approach this problem and solve it efficiently for certain
sizes of k or cardinalities of the classes Ni . For example, a time-space tradeoff is
discussed in [13, Section 6], where a similar MCSS occurs in a more theoretical
approach to integer factorization. There, the solution of the MCSS corresponds to
the sum S := p+q of the two prime factors of semiprime numbers N = pq. While it
would be enough to solve one MCSS instance in order to find S (and thereby factor
N ), the problem of the approach in [13] in terms of efficiency is that both k and
the classes Ni become quite large (around the size of log N ). In our present setting,
however, we are basically free to choose k and may also control the cardinalities
of the Ni by deciding in advance which prime powers to include as factors of M .
We may hence choose from the large variety of available techniques for minimizing
(5.1), one of which is based on lattice reduction.
   It is well known that the LLL-algorithm ([20]) for lattice reduction can be used
to solve a certain class of knapsack and subset-sum problems in polynomial-time
([28]). In particular, consider the standard subset-sum problem
(5.2)                             a1 x1 + · · · + aℓ xℓ = s,
where the ai and s are integers. The task is to find (x1 , . . . , xℓ ) ∈ {0, 1}ℓ such that
(5.2) is satisfied. An important quantity is the density d := ℓ/ log2 (maxi ai ). In [5]
it is shown that an oracle for finding the shortest vector in a special lattice can be
used to solve almost all subset-sum problems with d < 0.9408. In practice, this
oracle is replaced by an√application of the LLL-algorithm. The procedure works
as follows: For n := ⌈ 21 ℓ⌉, we define the lattice L ⊆ Zℓ+1 generated by the rows
r1 , . . . , rℓ+1 of the matrix
                                                     
                                  1 0 · · · 0 na1
                                 0 1 · · · 0 na2 
                                                     
                                 .. .. . .    ..  ..  .
                                . .
                                           . .     . 
                                                      
                                 0 0 · · · 1 nan 
                                  1  1
                                  2  2  · · · 12 ns
                                     SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                         19

                                                             Pℓ
If (x1 , . . . , xℓ ) is a solution to (5.2), the vector v = i=1 xi ri −rℓ+1√ = (y1 , . . . , yℓ , 0)
is an element of L, where yi ∈ {− 21 , 12 } and, hence, ∥v∥2 ≤ 12 ℓ. Knowing v, it
is easy to retrieve a solution to the subset-sum problem. Therefore, the hope of
applying the LLL-algorithm is that v will occur in the reduced basis of L.
    If we apply the approach of lattice reduction for standard subset-sum directly to
MCSS, the multiple-choice restriction (choosing exactly one element from each class
Ni ) is not accounted for in the definition of the lattice L, hence too many vectors
representing invalid solutions will be in the reduced basis. We now discuss an idea
for solving this problem. As mentioned, we consider the classes N1 , N2 , . . . , Nk , and
each class contains the weights ωi,1 , . . . , ωi,κi , where i = 1, . . . , k and κi := |Ni |.
Moreover, let α ∈ N be a natural number which will be specified later. Our idea
is to introduce a set of dummy subset-sum problems in the last few columns of
the matrix by which the lattice is defined. The purpose is to force the lattice
reduction algorithms into favoring vectors that correspond to choosing exactly one
weight from each class. For example, assume that κi√= 2 for every i and that s is
the target sum of our MCSS. Moreover, let n := ⌈ 21 k⌉. In this case, the matrix
defining the lattice is of the shape
                                                                            
                         1 0 0 0 · · · 0 0 α 0 · · · 0 nω1,1
                       0 1 0 0 · · · 0 0 α 0 · · · 0 nω1,2 
                                                                            
                       0 0 1 0 · · · 0 0 0 α · · · 0 nω2,1 
                                                                            
                       0 0 0 1 · · · 0 0 0 α · · · 0 nω2,2 
(5.3)                                                                    ..  .
                                                                            
                       .. .. .. .. . .         .. .. .. .. . .   ..
                      . . . .
                                            .   .  .  .   .    .  .      .  
                                                                             
                       0 0 0 0 · · · 1 0 0 0 · · · α nωk,1 
                                                                            
                       0 0 0 0 · · · 0 1 0 0 · · · α nωk,2 
                         1   1   1   1
                         2   2   2   2   · · · 21 12 α α · · · α        ns
So in addition to what we have seen in the matrix for the standard subset-sum
problem, we add one additional column for each class, namely
                        (α, α, 0, 0, . . . , 0, α)T , (0, 0, α, α, . . . , 0, α)T
and so on. It is clear how the definition of this matrix may be generalized to classes
withPmore than two weights in them. Let us consider this general case, and set
ℓ = i κi . If (x1 , . . . , xℓ ) is a binary vector encoding a solution to the MCSS (in
the same way as described above for standard subset-sum), then the vector
                            ℓ
                            X
                       v=          xi ri − rℓ+1 = (y1 , . . . , yℓ , 0, · · · , 0, 0)
                             i=1
                                                                                     √
with yi ∈ {− 21 , 12 } will be in the lattice L ⊆ Zℓ+k+1 , and satisfies ∥v∥2 = 21 k.
   Besides searching for a short vector in the lattice L, we may also reduce MCSS
to a specific Closest Vector Problem (CVP). This can be achieved by considering
the lattice L′ defined by the matrix in (5.3) without the last row, and then defining
the target vector t := (0, . . . , 0, α, α, . . . α, N s)T . We already know that the vector
in L′ corresponding to the solution (x1 , . . . , xℓ ) is very close to t. In the context
of our research on the idea in [13], we conducted proof-of-concept experiments
and noticed that this CVP approach works much better in practice than the SVP
approach discussed above. One apparent  √            reason is that there can be vectors in L
that are still much shorter than 12 k in the euclidean norm. Most of these vectors
20                                     M. HITTMEIR


relate to some combination of the weights in the last column of (5.3) that sums to
0 and omit the last row. The formulation of the CVP prevents this behavior.
   We may transform our modular MCSS into an ordinary MCSS by defining the
class N0 := {0, M, 2M, . . . (k − 1)M } and setting the approximative target sum
s = (k − 1)M . In addition, note that the LLL approach described above only works
for an exact target sum. However, [15, Section 6] shows how one may reduce any
approximate MCSS instance to an exact one by dividing all weights by the approx-
imate bound. Of course, there are several other aspects and details to consider,
and we will elaborate on this approach in future work. One goal would be to prove
an analogue of the standard subset-sum density result in [5] for our adaptation to
MCSS. Such a result would also inform the choice of M in our SSS setting. As
already mentioned, we want to take M as large as possible. Using lattice reduction
for subsequently finding a relatively small value x in the related subsum has the
potential of increasing our chances of finding smooth values of polynomials f .
5.2. Small modular roots of linear polynomials. Let us now assume that we
fix the value x (with regards to a certain modulus M ) and try to find divisors m
of M such that the ratio (x (mod m))/m is minimized. One technique that might
allow us to use larger values of M is Coppersmith’s method ([4]). In particular,
consider the following result ([22, Theorem 3]).
Theorem 5.1. Let M be an integer which has an unknown divisor m ≥ M β ,
where 0 < β ≤ 1. Let 0 < ε < 17 β. Furthermore, let g(X) be a univariate monic
polynomial of degree δ. Then we can find all solutions x0 for g(X) ≡ 0 mod m
with
                                        1 β2
                                |x0 | ≤ M δ −ε .
                                        2
The running time is polynomial in ε−1 , δ and log M .
   Assume that there is some divisor m ≥ M β of M such that the residue x0 of x
                                  2
modulo m satisfies |x0 | ≤ 12 M β −ε . Then we can find x0 by running Theorem 5.1
with the polynomial g(X) = X − x. Having found x0 , it is easy to determine the
corresponding divisor m and, thus, a suitable pair (x0 , m) with low ratio. Solving
linear equations modulo unknown divisors has also been studied in [9] and [21].
While this idea appears interesting in theory, it is not yet clear whether it is actually
applicable to our problem. The main question is how to choose M and β to ensure
the existence of pairs (x0 , m) that satisfy the bounds.
5.3. A genetic algorithm. Finally, we assume an unrestricted search approach
that chooses x and M together in an attempt to minimize the objective function
ψ = |x|/M . For example, we could comb through different choices of x and M ,
save all pairs (x, M ) for which ψ is below a certain bound in a set of candidates
C, and regularly apply the smooth-batch procedure to C to find smooth values of
f (x). This idea was our starting point for the SSS implementation before applying
the more refined collision-based approach. In any case, there may be other, more
elaborated approaches to quickly generate (and identify) suitable pairs (x, M ). One
such possibility is a genetic algorithm ([8]). In general, genetic algorithms solve an
optimization problem by representing the search space by a number of individuals
(the “population”) that represent possible solutions. Each individual is represented
by a so-called “chromosome” that reflects its properties. In our case, we may just
use the representation vectors (x1 , . . . , xn ) as discussed in the beginning of Section 3.
                                   SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                           21


The next step is to find the best individuals in the population with regards to a
fitness function. Here, we could use a version of our objective function ψ = |x|/M .
Finally, the best n individuals are selected as “parents” for the next generation,
which is obtained by applying certain changes (the “crossovers” and “mutations”) to
the chromosomes. For example, we could change a random value in a chromosome
(mutation), or we could take the chromosomes from two parents (say, (x1 , . . . , xn )
and (y1 , . . . , yn )) and generate a child chromosome as (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , yi , . . . , yn ) for
some random index i (crossover). As soon as we have obtained enough chromosomes
for the next generation, the whole process starts again, i.e., we choose the best
individuals and apply mutation and crossover.
   Using the chromosomes and the fitness function as discussed above, we could
immediately apply a genetic algorithm to solve the SSS problem. However, the main
difficulty in improving the current implementation is in finding suitable mutation
and crossover operations. Ideally, they would incorporate our current strategy and
have a tendency of generating individuals with a smaller ratio of x and M than
their parents. It may also make sense to combine the genetic algorithm with the
ideas discussed in the previous subsections.

5.4. Further speedups. In addition to the Knuth-Schroeppel multiplier and Bern-
stein’s optimizations for the smooth-batch procedure discussed at the end of Sec-
tion 3.2, there are other possible ways for improving SSS. Here are four examples.
      • There are certain details of the algorithm that could be changed and played
        with. For example, we could use more than the |I| different values for x in
        Step 6 of search, prolonging the time before having to initialize a new run
        of the function. We could also use other divisors of M as elements in M in
        the for-loop in Step 11, not only its prime factors.
      • We may control the batch size (i.e., the cardinality of C) in smooth batch.
        At the moment, we just apply the smooth-batch procedure at the end of
        each run of the main loop in search. It might be better to collect more
        candidates until we have reached a certain number in C or Cf .
      • One can certainly fine-tune the currently used parameters. For example,
        our current choices of ρ and δ in SSSf are most likely not optimal for larger
        numbers. It may also make sense to try other values for m and n.
      • Due to the simplicity of SSS, the whole procedure is cut out for paralleliza-
        tion. Different runs of search are independent from one another, so we may
        easily use more than one processor for the collection of smooth relations.
        In addition, the main loop in search is also parallelizable.


                                          6. Summary
   This paper presented Smooth Subsum Search, a new heuristic search approach
for finding smooth values of polynomials. We have applied SSS as part of an integer
factorization algorithm. For inputs between 30 and 100 digits, we compared SSS
to the Self-initializing Quadratic Sieve. Our results show that SSS runs around 10
times faster for inputs with 30 to 40 digits, and 5 to 7 times faster for inputs with 45
to 70 digits. SSSf, an improved version of the original procedure for the application
on larger numbers, is also 5 to 7 times faster in finding relations for inputs with 75
to 100 digits. In addition, we have presented three ideas for possible variants and
22                                        M. HITTMEIR


further speedups in Section 5. Our future research will concern a detailed investiga-
tion of these approaches. In particular, the lattice-based approach in Section 5.1 for
solving MCSS problems could have other applications besides integer factorization.
We will also work on the optimizations of the current implementation discussed
in Section 5.4. Finally, we intend to explore further applications of SSS in other
algorithms that also depend on finding smooth values of polynomials, such as the
Number Field Sieve.

Implementation. The reader may find our implementations of SSS and SSSf, the
code for the runtime experiments conducted in Section 4, the inputs N used in the
experiments, as well as the individual results for each N here: https://github.
com/sbaresearch/smoothsubsumsearch.


                                         References
  [1] D. J. Bernstein, How to find smooth parts of integers, https://cr.yp.to/factorization/
      smoothparts-20040510.pdf, 2004.
  [2] H. Boender, H. J. J. te Riele, Factoring Integers with Large-Prime Variations of the Qua-
      dratic Sieve, Exp. Math., 5: 257–273, 1996.
  [3] S. Contini, Factoring integers with the self-initializing quadratic sieve, Masters Thesis, U.
      Georgia, 1997.
  [4] D. Coppersmith, Finding a Small Root of a Univariate Modular Equation, Lecture Notes
      in Computer Science, 1070: 155–165, 1996.
  [5] M. J. Coster et al., Improved low-density subset sum algorithms, Computational Complexity,
      2: 111–128, 1992.
  [6] R. Crandall, C. Pomerance, Prime Numbers, A Computational Perspective, Second Edition,
      Springer Science+Business Media Inc., New York, 2005.
  [7] J. D. Dixon, Asymptotically Fast Factorization of Integers, Math. Comp., 36 (153): 255–260,
      1981.
  [8] D. E. Goldberg, J. H. Holland, Genetic Algorithms and Machine Learning, Machine Learn-
      ing, 3: 95–99, 1988.
  [9] M. Herrmann, A. May, Solving Linear Equations Modulo Divisors: On Factoring Given Any
      Bits, In: Pieprzyk, J. (eds) Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2008, Lecture Notes in
      Computer Science 5350, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
 [10] D. Harvey, An exponent one-fifth algorithm for deterministic integer factorisation, Math.
      Comp., 90 (332), 2937–2950, 2021.
 [11] M. Hittmeir, A babystep-giantstep method for faster deterministic integer factorization,
      Math. Comp., 87 (314): 2915–2935, 2018.
 [12] M. Hittmeir, A time-space tradeoff for Lehman’s deterministic integer factorization method,
      Math. Comp., 90 (330): 1999–2010, 2021.
 [13] M. Hittmeir, Integer factorization as subset-sum problem, J. Number Theory, 249: 93–118,
      2023.
 [14] D. Harvey, M. Hittmeir, A log-log speedup for exponent one-fifth deterministic integer fac-
      torisation, Math. Comp., 91 (335): 1367–1379, 2021.
 [15] N. Howgrave-Graham, A. Joux, New generic algorithms for hard knapsacks, EUROCRYPT
      2010, 235–256, 2010.
 [16] H. Kellerer, U. Pferschy, D. Pisinger, Knapsack Problems, Springer, Berlin, 2004.
 [17] Ç. K. Koç and S. N. Arachchige, A fast algorithm for gaussian elimination over GF(2) and
      its implementation on the GAPP, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 13 (1):
      118–122, 1991.
 [18] A. K. Lenstra, Integer Factoring, Designs, Codes and Cryptography, 19: 101-128, 2000.
 [19] A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra (eds.), The development of the number field sieve, Lecture
      Notes in Math. 1554, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1993.
 [20] A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, L. Lovász, Factoring Polynomials with Rational Coefficients,
      Ann. of Math., 261(4): 515–534, 1982.
                                SMOOTH SUBSUM SEARCH                                       23


[21] Y. Lu, R. Zhang, L. Peng, D. Lin, Solving Linear Equations Modulo Unknown Divisors:
     Revisited., In: Iwata, T., Cheon, J. (eds) Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2015,
     Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9452, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015.
[22] A. May, Using LLL-Reduction for Solving RSA and Factorization Problems, In: Nguyen,
     P., Vallée, B. (eds) The LLL Algorithm. Information Security and Cryptography. Springer,
     Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009.
[23] J. Milan, Factoring Small to Medium Size Integers: An Experimental Comparison, inria-
     0018864v2, 2010.
[24] M. A. Morrison, J. Brillhart, A Method of Factoring and the Factorization of F7, Math.
     Comp., 29 (129): 183–205, 1975.
[25] C. Pomerance, Analysis and Comparison of Some Integer Factoring Algorithms, In: H. W.
     Lenstra and R. Tijdeman, Eds., Computational Methods in Number Theory, Math Centre
     Tracts—Part 1, Math Centrum, Amsterdam, 89–139, 1982.
[26] C. Pomerance, A Tale of Two Sieves, Notices of the AMS, 43 (12): 1473–1485, 1996.
[27] H. Riesel, Prime Numbers and Computer Methods for Factorization, Progress in Mathe-
     matics (Volume 126), 2nd Edition, Birkhäuser Boston, 1994.
[28] C. Schnorr, M. Euchner, Lattice Basis Reduction: Improved Practical Algorithms and Solv-
     ing Subset Sum Problems, Mathematical Programming, 66: 181–199, 1994.
[29] R. D. Silverman, The Multiple Polynomial Quadratic Sieve, Math. Comp., 48 (177): 329–
     339, 1987.
[30] S.S. Wagstaff Jr., The Joy of Factoring, American Math. Society, Providence, RI, 2013.

  SBA Research, Floragasse 7, 1040 Vienna, Austria
  Email address: mhittmeir@sba-research.org
