               Square root algorithms for the number field sieve
                                                Emmanuel Thomé



      To cite this version:
     Emmanuel Thomé. Square root algorithms for the number field sieve. Arithmetic of Finite Fields – WAIFI
     2012, Jul 2012, Bochum, Germany. pp.208-224, ⟨10.1007/978-3-642-31662-3_15⟩. ⟨hal-00756838⟩




                                        HAL Id: hal-00756838
                          https://inria.hal.science/hal-00756838v1
                                           Submitted on 23 Nov 2012




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.


                                              HAL Authorization
                  Square Root Algorithms for
                    the Number Field Sieve

                                 Emmanuel Thomé

                       INRIA Nancy, Villers-lès-Nancy, France



       Abstract. We review several methods for the square root step of the
       Number Field Sieve, and present an original one, based on the Chinese
       Remainder Theorem.


    We consider in this article the ﬁnal step of the Number Field Sieve (NFS) fac-
toring algorithm [3], namely the algebraic square root computation. This prob-
lem is stated as follows. Let K = Q(α) be a number ﬁeld, where α is deﬁned
as a root of the irreducible polyomial f (x) ∈ Z[x]. We further use the notation
d = deg f = [K : Q], and denote by OK the ring of integers of K. For brevity,
we assume throughout this article that f is a monic polynomial, although the
more general case fd 6= 1 can be treated similarly by     Q considering fd α in lieu
of α. Let S be a set of pairs (a, b) such that S(α) = (a,b)∈S (a − bα) is known
to be the square of an algebraic integer. Such a set S is the outcome of the lin-
ear algebra and character steps of the Number Field Sieve. The purpose of the
algebraic square root step is the computation of a polynomial T (x) ∈ Z[x] such
that T (α)2 = f ′ (α)2 S(α). Here, f ′ (α)2 is introduced merely in order to take into
account the possibility that a square root for S(α), despite being an algebraic
integer, needs not belong to the order Z[α]. For brevity again, this f ′ (α)2 term
will be omitted throughout this article.
    Two further characteristics of the problem, speciﬁcally related to the NFS
context, are also important. The ideals (a − bα)OK always have a known factor-
ization into prime ideals (the latter being for example readily available alongside
with the pairs (a, b), e.g. in a ﬁle). Furthermore, the output deﬁned as T (x)
above is not interesting per se. In the NFS, one intends to compute T (m) mod N ,
where m and N are known (N being the integer to factor). In some cases, it is
possible to achieve this goal without explicitly computing T (x).
    This article reviews several approaches for the algebraic square root task.
Most of them are classical, and date back to the early research on the NFS.
Let us recall that back in 1993, this square root step was regarded as diﬃ-
cult. Attacking the problem “directly” by computing the algebraic number S(α)
and later its square root, appeared a daunting task by then, and this justiﬁed
the development of ad hoc algorithms, such as Montgomery’s [14, 15] or Cou-
veignes’ [5] algorithms, which exploit the fact that the factorization of the ideals
(a − bα)OK is known. The practicality of asymptotically fast methods appeared
later and the direct approach then became realistic. Furthermore, while slower
than e.g. Montgomery’s algorithm, this method has turned out to be acceptably
fast, notably when compared with the overall cost of NFS. Because the direct
approach embarks less algebraic number theory background than Montgomery’s
method, it is sometimes preferred in NFS implementations [17, 8]. However the
direct approach, when stated in its simple form, is unable to tackle square root
problems arising with number ﬁelds having no inert primes (e.g. with Galois
group Z/2Z × Z/2Z). Such ﬁelds are typically encountered with the Special Num-
ber Field Sieve, and provide one of the justiﬁcations for the Chinese Remainder
Theorem (CRT)-based approach presented in this article.
    The algorithms presented in this article are all relevant, when applicable, for
modern integer factoring, and various working implementations can be found in
publicly available software [8, 17, 13]. These diﬀerent algorithms have actually
been used or at least tested for the rsa768 factoring eﬀort [11]. Furthermore, in
the context of the oracle-assisted RSA problem addressed in [10], a variant of
Montgomery’s algorithm is used, and proves particularly well-adapted.

    This article is organized as follows. The direct approach for computing the
square root is described in Section 1. Couveignes’ CRT-based method for the
odd-degree case is described in Section 2. Section 3 describes Montgomery’s
algorithm. The new CRT-based approach we propose is presented in Section 4.
Some viable approaches for the square root computation are not detailed here
(e.g. the one proposed in [4, § 3.6.2]), since they oﬀer no obvious advantage over
the ones presented here.
    Complexities of the algorithms presented are given as functions of the input
size. In order to be able to provide comparable estimates, we aﬀord some simpli-
fying assumptions. We assume that the set of pairs S occupies n bits. This leads
to coeﬃcients of S(α) each having size roughly n bits as well. The bit size of
S(α) is thus O(dn) overall. Similarly, coeﬃcients of T (α) have size roughly n/2
bits. We acknowledge that these estimates are slightly gross, but these do make
sense for the NFS context, and hold in practice. Furthermore, the number ﬁeld is
considered constant, so that most dependencies on the number ﬁeld parameters
are deliberately ignored. The notation M(k) is used throughout the document
to denote the time for multiplying k-bit integers.


1   The direct (lifting) approach

The direct method, which is also referred to as the p-adic, or lifting approach,
applies when there exists an inert prime in the number ﬁeld K. This is only
possible when the Galois group of the polynomial f admits an element of order d.
Generically, the Galois group of a polynomial used in the General Number Field
Sieve (GNFS) algorithm is the full symmetric group Sd , which implies that
this property is expected to be satisﬁed with overwhelming probability. This
is not so, however, with polynomials considered in the context of the Special
Number Field Sieve (SNFS). There, polynomials typically have some special
shape, which makes all sorts of Galois groups plausible. For instance, a degree 4
polynomial with Galois group Z/2Z × Z/2Z can be encountered. This very case is

                                        2
too frequent to be completely neglected, which makes the direct approach only
a partial solution to our problem.


1.1   Working p-adically

Let thus p be an inert prime (such that pOK is a prime ideal). To ﬁx ideas, p is
taken of manageable size (say at most 64 bits). The extension Kp = Qp/f (x) is
thus a degree d unramiﬁed extension of Qp . Let αp be a root of f in Kp . We have
a natural injective ring morphism from Z[α] to Zp [αp ]. The purpose of the lifting
approach is to use this injective morphism in order to recognize the square root
being sought.
    The ﬁrst step of the algorithm is the computation of a low-precision square
root for S(αp ). Let Fp (β) = Fpd be the residue ﬁeld of Kp , the projection Kp →
Fpd being given by αp 7→ β. By low-precision,  Q we understand the computation
of a square root of S(β) ∈ Fpd . Since S(β) = (a,b)∈S (a − bβ) and all (a, b)’s are
coprime, we know that S(β) 6= 0. Let T (x) ∈ Z[x] be, as above, a polynomial
deﬁning a square root T (α) of S(α). We know that T (β)2 = S(β), and our
computation in Fpd gives us the coeﬃcients of T (x) (or its opposite) modulo p.
In the ﬁeld Kp , we have

                                  T (αp )2 ∈ S(αp ) + pOK .

We thus have low-precision knowledge on the coeﬃcients of T , together with a
deﬁning equation. A Newton lifting approach then allows to recover all coeﬃ-
                                                                      S(αp )−T 2 (αp )
cients. For example, iterating the modiﬁcation T (αp ) ← T (αp ) +       2T (αp )
is suﬃcient. In practice, it is desirable to ﬁrst compute the inverse square root
instead, so that the iteration avoids inverse computations. Details are skipped,
and can be found in [1, 2].
    The key concern is the determination of the stopping point of the lifting
process. Since coeﬃcients of the desired solutions are known to be integers, we
know that above a certain lifting step, the p-adic coeﬃcients obtained for T (x)
no longer evolve. (The morphism Z[α] → Z[αp ] being injective, these coeﬃcients
are then the desired ones.) Therefore the number of lifting steps is controlled by
a bound on the result coeﬃcients, which can be provided with classical tools as
we do now.


1.2   Bound on the square root coefficients

Given a number ﬁeld K, we denote by σ1 , . . . , σr and σr+1 , . . . , σr+s the real
and non-conjugate complex embeddings. We further denote by σr+s+k = σr+k
                             Pd−1
for k = 1, . . . , s. Let U = i=0 ui αi ∈ K. The coeﬃcients ui of U are related
to the embedding values, since these are given by a polynomial expression with
coeﬃcients ui . Namely, we have

           (σ1 (U ), . . . , σd (U )) = (u0 , . . . , ud−1 ) × V (σ1 (α), . . . , σd (α))

                                                 3
where the matrix above is of Vandermonde type. Exploiting this relation in the
opposite direction, it is possible to derive a bound on the |ui | from a bound
on the |σi (U )|. A low precision computation of the inverse of the Vandermonde
matrix above suﬃces to obtain a reasonable bound at a moderate cost.
    Such a mechanism is typically used to bound the coeﬃcients of an element U
given the logarithms of the embeddings, where logarithms provide an additional
guard against exponent overﬂow. This can precisely be done in the context of
NFS square root computations. We know S(α), and look for T (α) ∈ Z[α] with
T (α)2 = S(α). Hence we have log |σi (T (α))| = 21 log |σi (S(α))|. Furthermore,
S(α) is also known in product form. The computation
                                          X
                     log |σi (S(α))| =             log |σi (a − bα)|
                                         (a,b)∈S


therefore appears rather accessible, as its computational cost is essentially that
of reading the input (set of (a, b) pairs).
    The computation of the required number of lifting step therefore proceeds as
follows.

 – Compute the complex roots of f . A computation with limited precision suf-
   ﬁces. The inverse of the matrix V (σ1 (α), . . . , σd (α)) is then computed (this
   is a Lagrange interpolation matrix). It is important, in order for the bound
   to be valid, to use rounding towards +∞ in the computations.
 – Then, the log |σi (S(α))| values may be computed.
 – Given this data, deduce a bound on the coeﬃcients |ti |.

Given a bound M obtained by this method, lifting may stop at precision k =
⌈logp M ⌉. This implies in particular that in computations where S(α) appears,
coeﬃcients may be reduced modulo pk , which provides noticeable savings in
computation time.
    One may notice that this bound computation requires no memory.


1.3   Complexity

The computation of a square root by Newton lifting is quasi-linear [1,2]. This also
holds in our case of interest here. We may write the complexity as O(d2 M(n)),
where n is the size in bits of the input coeﬃcients, and where d2 is taken for the
cost of multiplying polynomials of degree d − 1. (One may of course use better
algorithms than the naive one for this task. This is relevant only to a limited
extent in our range of interest, since d denotes an NFS degree.) Note that this
complexity is in fact dominated by the complexity of the preliminary computa-
tion of S(α) from the set S, which claims O(d2 M(n) log n) using a subproduct
tree.
    The space complexity of the direct approach is linear, namely O(dn). In
comparison to other approaches considered in this article, this approach does
compute T (x) as a prerequisite before computing T (m) as required by NFS.

                                           4
2     Couveignes’ algorithm
In [5], Couveignes proposes an algorithm which allows to avoid the space com-
plexity of the direct method above, and allows some parallelism. This approach
is based on the Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT), and is only applicable un-
der the simultaneous conditions that the number ﬁeld degree d be odd, and that
there exist inert primes1 .
    The approach goes as follows. We intend to compute T (α) with a CRT ap-
proach. Let {pi } be a collection of inert primes. For each such pi , we denote by
βi a root of f (x) modulo pi , and consider (often implicitly) the ring morphism
from K to Fpdi sending α to βi . We begin by computing a square root of S(βi )
for all i. Such a square root is denoted by Ti′ (βi ), and writes as Ti′ (βi ) = ±T (βi ).
We then wish to reconstruct the result T (x) as a polynomial with integer coeﬃ-
cients. For this purpose, we assume that a bound M on the coeﬃcients of T has
been obtained in a manner similar to the approach described in Subsection 1.2.
We assume that the product of the chosen primes pi exceeds the bound M . Sup-
pose then that Ti (x) = T (x) mod pi is known. Let qi be the smallest positive
integer
     Q such that qi mod pj = δi,j (one may write qi = s · (s mod pi ), where
                                                                   −1

s = j6=i pj ). We have then:
                                         X
                                 T (x) =    qi Ti (x).
                                             i

The stumbling block for such an approach is related to the choice of roots. We
have acquired knowledge of ±T (βi ), but this is only suﬃcient to determine Ti (x)
up to a sign. In presence of a large
                                P number of primes pi , ﬁnding the correct sign
combination in the expression i ±qi Ti′ (x) is intractable.
    In order to overcome this problem, Couveignes’ algorithm takes advantage
of the degree of K being odd. Under this assumption, we have
                           NormK/Q (−ζ) = − NormK/Q (ζ)
for any ζ ∈ K. In the particular case of the NFS square root, computing the
absolute value | NormK/Q (T (α))| is rather easy. Indeed, we know the factored
form of the principal ideal S(α)OK . We may thus write:
                                          Y
                              S(α)OK =        p2ep with ei ∈ Z,
                                                 p∈F
                                                 Y
                        | NormK/Q (S(α))| =            Norm(p)2ep ,
                                                 p∈F
                                                   Y
                          NormK/Q (T (α)) = ±            Norm(p)ep .
                                                  p∈F
1
    The existence of one or many inert primes are equivalent conditions, in virtue of
    Čebotarev’s density theorem. This theorem appears in countless graduate level alge-
    braic number theory textbooks. For an introduction to Čebotarev’s density theorem,
    including also historical aspects and applications, the article [12] is an interesting
    read.


                                             5
We acknowledge the fact that our chosen notation T (x) for the solution being
sought is ambiguous, given that there are two solutions. This accounts for the ±
sign in the equation above. From now on, we intend to focus on the computation
of one of these two solutions only, and we need to make one single consistent
choice. To this end, we require that the computed T (x) correspond to a positive
norm above. Such an arbitrary choice is legitimate, provided it is done only once
(if we were to combine mixed information related to either of the two diﬀer-
ent solutions for many primes, consistent reconstruction would be impossible).
Let thus ν be this positive norm, which is accessible to calculation. We have
NormK/Q (T (α)) = ν and NormK/Q (−T (α)) = −ν. Modulo pi , this property
transfers conveniently. We have
                            NormFpd /Fpi (T (βi )) = ν mod pi .
                                    i


This implies that given Ti′ (βi ), it is possible to decide whether Ti′ (βi ) = Ti (βi )
or Ti′ (βi ) = −Ti (βi ), by comparing NormFpd /Fpi (Ti′ (βi )) with ν mod pi .
                                                  i
    OncePthe sign problem has been solved, it is possible to use the expression
T (x) = i qi Ti (x). Note though that for the NFS application, only the quantity
T (m) mod N is needed eventually. Therefore, computing T (x) is unnecessary. It
is suﬃcient (and considerably cheaper) to write
                                 X
                 T (m) mod N ≡      (qi mod N )(Ti (m) mod N ).
                                        i

Complexity Let us assume that primes of ﬁxed size λ are considered2 Since
the result coeﬃcients occupy O(n) bits, it suﬃces to consider O(n/λ) primes.
We ﬁrst consider the complexity of such an approach in the perspective of a
constant space complexity. For each such prime, one has to read the input set
S, in order to compute the norm ν. This step dominates the complexity, since it
takes O(n2 ). Furthermore, parallelizing this step is not necessarily obvious, since
the complexity essentially consists of input-output operations (several threads
of a single processor may beneﬁt from a single read at the same time, but such
a beneﬁt does not scale well to a multi-machine setup).
    This approach
             √     is amenable√to a time-memory trade-oﬀ. It is possible to read
the set √
        S in n blocks of size n. For each such block, an intermediary product
of size n may be computed, and then reduced modulo each prime pi . In such
a way, the time complexity drops to O(n3/2 ), for a space complexity in O(n1/2 ).
Such a modiﬁcation could be considered in a distributed setting, as it oﬀers more
opportunities for parallelization.

3     Montgomery’s algorithm
Montgomery’s algorithm [14,15] for the square root step is the one which is most
specially crafted for the NFS square root situation. This algorithm radically
2
    The obvious ﬁniteness of the number of primes satisfying this criterion is an irrelevant
    concern here.


                                              6
diﬀers from the two algorithms presented above, as well as from the one which
is described in Section 4. The original description of Montgomery’s algorithm is
given in [14], although the unpublished draft [15] is also worth reading in that
it contains additional details. Nguyen also presented Montgomery’s algorithm
in [16].
    Montgomery’s algorithm is not dependent on strong assumptions as the al-
gorithms presented above. In particular, the Galois group of the deﬁning poly-
nomial is not an obstacle for Montgomery’s algorithm. However, the knowledge
of the factorization of the ideal S(α)OK as a product involving only ideals of
small norm is crucially important. Furthermore, as we will see, the “dependency
on 2” is especially good with this algorithm. More precisely, this algorithm may
be stated in a more general way as an algorithm for computing a λ-th root,
where λ is any integer, provided that the factorization of S(α) remains known.
Of course, in such a case, one expects the coeﬃcients of T (α) to be λ times
smaller than those of S(α). This generalization matters to the oracle-assisted
computation of λ-th roots as detailed in [10], and accounts for our choice to
present Montgomery’s algorithm in the extended setting λ ≥ 2.
    We are interested in the factored form of the ideal S(α)OK . In the NFS
context, the computation of the maximal order OK of the number ﬁeld K is
a hard problem, because the discriminant of polynomials used in the (general)
NFS is possibly even harder to factor than the number which we intend to factor
in the ﬁrst place. Yet, given a monic polynomial f (x), factoring its discriminant
is necessary in order to decide which are the primes p for which the index [OK :
Z[α]] is divisible by p. For such primes, we say that locally at p, the order Z[α]
is not maximal, since OK is larger.
    A very important observation is that for the purpose of factoring ideals over
a prescribed factor base, which consists of all primes ideals above a prescribed
set of primes, it is suﬃcient to work with an order O which is maximal at those
primes only, and needs not be maximal over all primes. For the ideals considered,
factorization into O-ideals or OK -ideals coincide. Extension of a starting order
to a p-maximal one for a ﬁnite set of primes p can be done using Zassenhaus’
Round-2 algorithm, as presented for example in [4]. The computation of such an
order O is an inexpensive preliminary step for Montgomery’s algorithm, and we
assume it is done.
    The following paragraphs use the notation F for the set of prime ideals
occuring in the factorization of S(α) (considerations related to “large primes”
aside, this can be thought of as the factor base).


3.1   Iterative reduction

The main idea of the algorithm is the following. The computation has an iterative
structure, and the successive steps are numbered from step number 0 onwards.
Throughout the course of the computation, an expression such as the following
one is maintained (we recall that λ denotes the order of the root which we intend

                                        7
to compute, e.g. classically λ = 2):
                                                              (k)
                                       ǫ
                                                    Y
                       S(α)(γ0ǫ0 . . . γk−1
                                         k−1 −λ
                                            ) O=          pλ·ep
                                                    p∈F

where the integer k denotes the step of the calculation, starting at k = 0. We
use γi to denote some algebraic number which is computed at step i. We also
denote by ǫi a sign, which is used as a notational convenience for a choice between
                                                     (k)
numerator and denominator. The exponents ep may become negative in the
course of the computation.
    The aim of these reduction steps is to transform the left-hand side above into
an algebraic number which has small coeﬃcients. Not only do we wish to obtain
an ideal factorization which is as small as possible (possibly trivial), but we also
strive to minimize the unit contribution as well, which is important to minimize
the size of the coeﬃcients.
                                              ǫk−1 −λ
    We denote by Sk (α) = S(α)(γ0ǫ0 . . . γk−1     )   (in particular, S0 (α) = S(α)).
Step k of the algorithm chooses a subset of the ideals appearing in the factor-
                     (k)
ization p∈F p·ep . This factorization naturally decomposes into a numerator
         Q
(positive exponents) and a denominator (negative exponents). We choose a set
Ik = p1 . . . pnk , which consists of ideals all appearing in the numerator, or all in
the denominator (in this notation we do not forbid a given ideal to be selected
                                                                           (k)
several times, provided that its multiplicity in Ik does not exceed |ep |). We in-
tend to reduce the contribution of the the ideals p1 , . . . , pnk to the factorization
of Sk (α)O.
    A reduced basis (e.g., an LLL-reduced basis suﬃces) of the ideal Ik is com-
puted. In this way, we obtain algebraic integers belonging to Ik . Such an algebraic
integer v satisﬁes NormK/Q (Ik ) | NormK/Q (v), and also the following inequality:

                                def   NormK/Q (v)
                          m(v) =                    ≤ CK ,
                                      NormK/Q (Ik )

where the constant CK is eﬀectively computable (it depends only on K). Suppose
we are given such an element v. Without loss of generality, we consider the case
that Ik is a factor of the numerator of Sk (α)O. We then have:

             Norm(Sk (α)v −λ ) = Norm(Sk (α)) Norm(Ik )−λ m(v)−λ .

In the factorization of Sk (α)v −λ OK , the norm of the numerator is reduced by a
factor Norm(Ik )λ in comparison to Sk (α)OK . At the same time, the norm of the
denominator increases by m(v)λ ≤ Ckλ . Therefore, provided that Ik is chosen to
have a norm signiﬁcantly larger than the constant CK , we obtain in this way a
reduction of the size of the expression. This reduction step is the workhorse of
Montgomery’s algorithm.
    The iterative reduction step may possibly complete with a trivial ideal fac-
torization, in other words with some Sk (α) being a unit. For this unit to be
acceptably small, and accessible to direct λ-th root computation, it is important

                                           8
to “guide” the reduction step. The guiding principle is that the logarithms of the
complex embeddings log|σi (Sk (α)v −λ )| should become as balanced as possible:
among the diﬀerent short vectors v formed by the reduced basis of Ik , some lead
Sk (α)v −λ OK to reduce the jitter in the logarithmic complex embeddings, while
some others have the opposite eﬀect. The former are favored. In practice this
suﬃces to obtain a ﬁnal Sk (α) which is a unit (thus the ideal factorization is
indeed trivial), and furthermore has trivial logarithmic embeddings, so that it is
actually a root of unity.
    More details on Montgomery’s algorithm, together with an example, can
be found in [15]. An implementation of Montgomery’s algorithm can be found
in [13]. We also mention a Magma prototype by the author in [8].


3.2   Complexity

Complexity of Montgomery’s algorithm, especially in the extended case λ ≥ 2
which is useful for the context in [10], calls for a more precise consideration of
the input and output sizes. We assume that the input set S occupies n bits.
This set S is obtained in a manner similar to the NFS situation: the solution of
some linear system is computed so as to force exponents in the corresponding
ideal factorization to cancel modulo λ. Naturally, this linear system is deﬁned
modulo λ, and so are the coeﬃcients of this combination. Therefore, our set S
naturally consists of (a, b) pairs together with exponents for each pair, which
contribute to the size of S(α). For an input size of n bits for S, we thus expect
O(λn) bits for the coeﬃcients of S(α), and O(n) bits for the coeﬃcients of its
λ-th root T (α).
    Observe now that S(α) is never computed by Montgomery’s algorithm. Each
reduction step has a cost which is linear in the size of Ik , and more importantly
in the size reduction obtained with respect to the input set. The calculations
related to the unit contributions are also done incrementally, and have linear
cost in the size of Ik . Therefore the complexity of the algorithm is linear, and
the dependency on λ is of logarithmic type. The dependency on the parameters
of the ﬁeld K is not detailed here.


4     A new CRT-based lifting approach

We describe here a new approach which is a mix between the direct approach
(Section 1) and Couveignes’ CRT algorithm (Section 2). This approach, just as
Montgomery’s algorithm, is free of limiting assumptions on the number ﬁeld. In
particular, we do not assume the existence of inert primes.
    This work may be considered as connected to recent works by Enge and
Sutherland [6], as well as by Sutherland [18], on the topic of the CRT-based
computation of class polynomials in the context of the complex multiplication
method for constructing elliptic curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds. In these works, as well
as in the method described here, the “explicit” aspect of the CRT is particularly
important.

                                        9
    Let d = [K : Q]. We recall that for brevity we have restricted our presentation
to the case where the polynomial f deﬁning the number ﬁeld K is monic. As
stated already before, we know a way to obtain a bound on the coeﬃcients of
the result T (α) which is being sought. We thus assume that such a bound M
has been computed and is available.
    Let P = {pi } be a set of ℓ = t × r totally split primes3 . (The form ℓ = t × r
will allow us later to partition P into t distinct
                                          l         msubsets of size r, for distribution
                                            log M/ǫ
purposes.) Let P = p∈P p and λ =                      , where ǫ ≤ 1 is an arbitrarily
                       Q
                                              log P
chosen value discussed later. We thus have M ≤ ǫP λ . We denote by B = λℓ log2 P
the bit-size of pλ for primes p ∈ P.
    Following our assumptions for estimating complexities, the expected bit size
of the coeﬃcients of T (α) is n/2, where as previously n denotes the size of the
input set S. We thus expect expect log2 M ≈ ℓB ≈ n/2.


4.1    CRT-based reconstruction

The square root is computed from several calculations done modulo pλi , for
each pi . One of the diﬃculties is naturally linked to resolving the indetermi-
nation among the two possible choices of square roots in each of the possible
residue ﬁelds Fpi . In total, the primes pi being totally split, we have ℓd square
roots to compute, and as many choices to make.
     For each pi , we denote by (ri,j )j=1...d the roots of f modulo pi . Since pi is
totally split, the values ri,j are d distinct elements of Fpi . This assumption also
allows to compute, corresponding to each ri,j , a lift r̃i,j in Z/pλi Z. We thus have
f (r̃i,j ) ≡ 0 mod pλi .
     For each pi and each ri,j , we compute a pi -adic lift of S(r̃i,j ), with preci-
                                                                     p

sion λ. Let Ti,j
               ′
                  be this lift. If T (x) denotes as usual the expression of our desired
square root in K, we have
                                        ′
                                      Ti,j = si,j T (r̃i,j ) where si,j = ±1.

   We wish to ﬁnd T (x) from the values T (r̃i,j ). The latter are, for now, known
only up to the sign si,j , and we postpone this sign problem for later analysis.
We consider the integers Qi and polynomials Hi,j (x) ∈ Z[x] deﬁned as follows:
                                                  λ
                                    def       P             Y
                               Qi =                     =           pλ ,
                                              pi            p∈P,
                                                            p6=pi

                              def     f (x)        Y
                         Hi,j =                  =   (x − r̃i,j ′ ).
                                    (x − r̃i,j )   ′    j 6=j


These polynomials are chosen so as to verify:

3
    The density of such primes is 1/# Gal(f ), again by Čebotarev’s density theorem.


                                                   10
Proposition 1 Let Ti,j = T (r̃i,j ) mod pλi . Then:
                                                           
                       X                           1         mod P λ .
             T (x) =       Qi Hi,j (x)Ti,j        ′ (r̃ )
                        i,j
                                             Q i f      i,j


In the statement above, the inverse is to be understood in the pi -adic ring Zpi , or
more precisely modulo pλi . The proof is straightforward. Remark that Qi mod pλi′
cancels for i′ 6= i, and that in the case i = i′ , Hi,j (r̃i′ ,j ′ ) mod pλi′ is exactly equal
to f ′ (r̃i,j ) for j ′ = j, and cancels otherwise. Then the bound M ≤ P λ on the
coeﬃcients of T yields the announced result.


4.2    Determining signs

Proposition 1 allows to reconstruct T (x) as soon as all Ti,j are known. However,
from the computation of roots modulo pi , we only know Ti,j     ′
                                                                   = si,j Ti,j . Still,
by examining the coeﬃcient of degree d − 1 in T (x), we obtain the following
                              4

identity, which is derived from the expression in Proposition 1:
                                  X                    1
                 [xd−1 ]T (x) =         Qi Ti,j                   mod P λ ,
                                  i,j
                                                  Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )
               1 d−1         X 1              1
                                                                 
                                                               λ
                 [x ]T (x) =         Ti,j                 mod pi mod 1.
              Pλ             i,j
                                 pλi      Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )

Let now xi,j and yi,j be the real numbers
                                                         
                          1            1                λ
                  xi,j = λ Ti,j                   mod pi ∈ [0, 1[,
                         pi       Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )
                                                         
                          1     ′      1                λ
                  yi,j = λ Ti,j                   mod p i   ∈ [0, 1[,
                         pi       Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )
                          ≡ ±xi,j       mod 1.

We can show that the sum of the xi,j numbers is exceptionally close to an integer.
Indeed, the coeﬃcient [xd−1 ]T (x) is at most M . Thus we have:

                               1 d−1
                                 [x  ]T (x) ≤ M P −λ ≤ ǫ,
                              Pλ

where ǫ is the arbitrary parameter introduced above. As a consequence, we have:
                X                        X
                    xi,j ∈ [−ǫ, ǫ] + Z,     si,j yi,j ∈ [−ǫ, ǫ] + Z.
                  i,j                                  i,j

4
    Any coeﬃcient of T (x) may be considered. The only special thing about degree d − 1
    is that the corresponding expression is shorter to write.


                                                  11
This implies that by solving a knapsack-like problem, we may ﬁnd which is the
“right” combination of the yi,j coeﬃcients, thereby solving the sign indetermina-
tion problem. Such problems are hard to solve, and are discussed further down.
Let us only mention brieﬂy that at least for modest numbers of primes, this
problem remains practical.
P Once the si,j have been computed,                 we deduce the integer κd−1 close to
   i,j xi,j . We also obtain T i,j = s i,j T  ′
                                             i,j . This gives:

           1 d−1          X 1                   1
                                                                    
                                         ′                        λ
             [x  ]T (x) =         s    T
                                    i,j i,j                 mod p i   − κd−1 .
          Pλ              i,j
                              pλi           Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )

We can generalize this approach to now derive information relative to all coeﬃ-
cients of T (x). This requires taking into account the interpolating polynomials
Hi,j (x). We deﬁne
                                                               
                                 k    ′   Hi,j (x)            λ
                      ci,j,k = [x ] Ti,j                 mod pi ,
                                         Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )
                      c∗i,j,k = si,j ci,j,k .

The coeﬃcients ci,j,k generalize the notations xi,j and yi,j above, since we have

                               c∗i,j,d−1                     ci,j,d−1
                      xi,j =               ,    and yi,j =            .
                                  pλi                           pλi

We may use these notations to write a generalization of the expression above,
and likewise for the expression of Proposition 1:
                    1 k            X 1
                     λ
                       [x ]T (x) =       λ
                                           [xk ]si,j ci,j,k − κk ,
                   P               i,j
                                       p i
                                   X
                                       xk Qi si,j ci,j,k − κk P λ .
                                                                   
                           T (x) =
                                        i,j,k

     Finally, we recall that the aim of the square root computation step is not re-
ally to compute T (x), but instead its evaluation T (m) mod N , as already stated
previously. As a consequence of the formula above, we are thus interested in
ci,j,k mk mod N , which is a priori signiﬁcantly smaller than pλi .

4.3   Strategies for fast computation
The algorithm sketched so far needs some tuning, because the split into several
computations, if done incorrectly, may in fact do more harm than good with
respect to the overall complexity. The ﬁrst important concern is the computation
of the values S(r̃i,j ). Recall that these are dℓ B-bit integers. In order to compute
these values eﬃciently, one may proceed as follows. First compute S(α) with a
subproduct tree (see e.g. [7, § 10.1]). Then proceed by computing reductions of all
d coeﬃcients modulo the ℓ prime powers pλi . This multimodular reduction step

                                                12
Algorithm crtalgsqrt(N, m, f, S)

Input:    f monic irreducible, deﬁning K = Q(α),
          N integer,
          m a root of f modulo N .
          S set of pairs (a, b) such that S(α) = (a − bα) ∈ Z[α]2 .
                                                Q
Parameters:ℓ = r × t, number of primes to consider.
Output:   T (m) mod N , where T (α)2 = S(α).

 1. Choose t sets P1 , . . . , Pt of r primes totally split in K.
    Partition S into t disjoints subsets S1 , . . . , St .
 2. For k = 1, . . . , t, read Sk . Deduce M and λ. Compute Sk (x) = (a,b)∈Sk (a −
                                                                                  Q

    bx) mod f .
 3. For i = 1, . . . , ℓ compute: pλi , Qi , Q1i mod pλi , as well as for j = 1, . . . , d, the root
                                                                        H   (x)
    ri,j mod pi of f , the lift r̃i,j with precision λ, as well as f ′i,j
                                                                      (r̃i,j )
                                                                               mod pλi .
 4. For τ = 1, . . . , t:
                                     def
    4.1. Compute (Sσ (x) mod Pτ = {Sσ (x) mod p, p ∈ Pτ })σ=1...t .
    4.2. For each pi ∈ Pτ , and for j = 1, . . . , d, compute:
         4.2.1 the evaluations Sσ (r̃i,j ) mod pλi for σ = 1, . . . , t,
         4.2.2 the products S(r̃i,j ),
         4.2.3 the square roots Ti,j   = S(r̃i,j ) mod pλi .
                                   ′
                                          p
                                                                          
                                                      Hi,j (x)
         4.2.4 the coeﬃcients ci,j,k = [xk ] Ti,j′
                                                    Qi f ′ (r̃i,j )
                                                                    mod pλi , as well as ci,j,k /pλi ∈
              R, and ci,j,k mk mod N .
 5. Find the signs si,j and the integer κd−1 such that                                   λ
                                                                P
                                                                    i,j si,j (ci,j,d−1 /pi ) − κd−1   ≤
    ǫ. Deduce the integers κ0 , . . . , κd−2 .
 6. return i,j,k Qi si,j ci,j,k mk − κk P λ mod N .
           P


                Algorithm 1: NFS square root using lifting and CRT.


may again be achieved with a subproduct tree. Finally, the evaluations modulo
all r̃i,j is again a multi-evaluation, albeit relatively shallow, since we have only
d evaluation points.
    For an n-bit input, recall that we have set ℓB ≈ n/2. Hence the ﬁrst two
steps above respectively have complexity O(d2 M(n) log n) and O(dM(n) log n).
The multi-evaluation at all r̃i,j has complexity O(ℓd2 M(B)).
    This algorithm allows some trivial limited parallelism. We can achieve a t-
fold reduction of the space complexity for the computation of the values S(r̃i,j ),
and likewise for the time complexity, using t2 nodes. This is done by splitting
both S and P into t equally sized parts denoted by S1 , . . . , St and P1 , . . . , Pt ,
respectively.
    Corresponding to each set Sσ , we deﬁne the polynomial Sσ (x) as being the
product
                                      Y
                           Sσ (x) =         (a − bx) mod f.
                                         (a,b)∈Sσ


                                                 13
For each pair of indices (σ, τ ), we deﬁne the r-uple:

                                   def
                   Sσ (x) mod Pτ = {Sσ (x) mod p, p ∈ Pτ }.

Each of t2 nodes, indexed by (σ, τ ), may compute the quantity above. The time
and space complexity on each node are thus (1/t)-th of the total amount given
above.
    Once the values Sσ (r̃i,j ) have been computed, the values S(r̃i,j ) correspond-
ing to the complete input set S can be obtained as the product over all σ.
    The steps we have just detailed form the core of algorithm 1, namely steps 4.1,
4.2.1, and 4.2.2. Other steps of this algorithm are not detailed at length here. In
algorithm 1, we have chosen to present the parallel version on up to t2 nodes, but
instantiating with t = 1 gives the version which is best suited for a sequential
implementation.


4.4   Complexity

Table 1 gives complexity estimates for the diﬀerent steps of the algorithm. Con-
cerning parallelization, steps 3, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4 clearly scale to up to ℓ nodes
easily. We have shown in the previous paragraphs how steps 4.1 to 4.2.2 may
be improved t-fold in a quite simple way when run over t2 nodes, neglecting
communication costs.
    The complexity of step 5 of algorithm 1 is related to a knapsack-like problem.
                                                          1
It is straightforward to solve such a problem in time 2 2 dℓ , and the best known
approach is 2  0.313dℓ
                       [9].
    In total, the algorithm proposed has a time and space complexity of the order
of O(d2 M(n) log n), which is similar to the lifting approach of Section 1 (when
counting the computation of S(α) in the complexity).


                       Step         Time           Space
                       1            O(ℓ)           O(ℓ)
                       2            O(d2 M(n))     O(dn)
                       3            O(ℓd2 M(B))    O(dn)
                       4.1          O(dM(n) log n) O(dn log n)
                       4.2.1        O(ℓd2 M(B))    O(dn)
                       4.2.2        O(ℓdM(B))      O(dn)
                       4.2.3, 4.2.4 O(ℓdM(B))      O(dn)
                       5            O(2dℓ/2 )      O(2dℓ/2 )
                       6            O(ℓ)           O(ℓ)
Table 1. Time and space complexity of the diﬀerent steps of algorithm 1 (we
have rt = ℓ and rtB ≈ n/2).




                                         14
4.5   Implementation and experimental data

Algorithm 1 has been implemented in cado-nfs [8]. For a practical application,
the choice of parameters r and t is chieﬂy limited by the complexity of step 5
of the algorithm, since above some dimension, the knapsack problem becomes
intractable. This algorithm has been run for the RSA-768 square root calculation,
with the following parameters: d = 6, t = 3, r = 2, the total input size being
21 GB. On 18 nodes equipped with two 4-core Intel Xeon E5520 processors,
and 32 GB of RAM, the computation claimed 6 hours. In comparison, using
Montgomery’s algorithm, the same computation on diﬀerent hardware, but with
the same number of 144 cores, took 4 hours, as it was reported in [11].
    The diﬀerence in timings illustrates the diﬀerence in complexity. Montgomery’s
algorithm is linear, while the CRT-based algorithm we propose is quasi-linear.
Because Montgomery’s algorithm needs to exploit more accurate input data
(namely, the ideal factorization of each ideal (a − bα)OK ), the time for read-
ing this extended input set is signiﬁcant. If we were to ignore I/O costs, the
diﬀerence would be even more visible. Overall, the timings here are thus unsur-
prising. The CRT algorithm proposed here, compared to Montgomery’s, has the
advantage of not requiring the knowledge of the complete ideal factorization. In
the perspective of a complete NFS implementation, this is interesting in that
it simpliﬁes the data ﬂow, and also removes the need for an implementation of
accurate computation of ideal valuations at all prime ideals. In the context of
some NFS implementations which so far have chosen to restrict to the direct
approach and avoid this step [8, 17], the CRT algorithm presented here oﬀers a
viable alternative.


4.6   A variant using a large number of primes

A variant of the algorithm above may be employed in order to handle a larger
number of primes (for example up to 10 000). To this end, it is important to avoid
the knapsack reconstruction step. An idea found in [6] allows to work around
this issue in the case where inert primes can be found. Let P be the set of primes
selected for the reconstruction. We assume each is chosen with exponent λ = 1,
although varying this parameter is possible. As done previously, we denote by
Tp (x) = T (x) mod p, for some p ∈ P, and also Tp′ (x) the expression of the square
root which is computed. Let sp be the sign such that Tp′ (x) = sp T (x) mod p.
    Let us focus on one particular coeﬃcient of T (x), for example that of degree
d − 1, which we denote by τ . Similarly to Tp and Tp′ , we deﬁne the notations τp =
τ mod p and τp′ = sp τ mod p. Lacking the knowledge of sp , we cannot distinguish
between τ mod p and −τ mod p. However, the set {τ mod p, −τ mod p} is well
determined by the computation of τp′ . We may thus compute unambiguously
τ 2 mod p = (τp′ )2 mod p. If this computation is done modulo   many primes p, we
can deduce the integer τ 2 . To this end, we must have p∈P p ≥ M 2 , where M
                                                           Q
is the bound on the coeﬃcients of T (x). The integer τ itself is then obtained
by the square root of an n-bit integer, which is signiﬁcantly cheaper than the

                                        15
algebraic square root we are computing here. A byproduct of this computation
is the set of signs {sp }, which allows to complete the calculation.
    This variant may also apply in a case without inert primes. In such a case, let
H ⊂ Sd be a representative set for the quotient Gal(L/Q)/ Gal(L/K), where
L is the normal closure of K. Let σ ∈ H be an element decomposing into a
minimal number of distinct cycles, and let γ be this minimum. We want to use
primes whose splitting pattern in K matches the cycle decomposition of σ. From
Čebotarev’s density theorem, it follows that the density of such primes is the
density of this cycle decomposition pattern in H, which in particular is positive.
If, as before, we try to relate τ mod p with the γ distinct coeﬃcients obtained
                                                                  (1)              (γ)
modulo each of the prime ideals above p, we have τ = ±τp′             ± . . . ± τp′ .
There are 2 possible combinations. By evaluating the elementary symmetric
              γ

functions on the 2γ possible solutions modulo each p, we obtain τ as the root of
an integer polynomial of degree 2γ . The worst case for this extension is when γ is
large: γ may reach d/2 in the case of Swinnerton-Dyer polynomials. We recover
unsurprisingly the hard case of factoring polynomials over number ﬁelds.


References

 [1] R.     P.    Brent,    Multiple-precision    zero-finding   methods   and
     the complexity of elementary function evaluation. In J. F.
     Traub      (ed.),    Analytic    computational      complexity,   151–176.
     Academic       Press,    New     York,    NY,       1975.   Available   at
     http://web.comlab.ox.ac.uk/oucl/work/richard.brent/ftp/rpb028.ps.gz.
     ↑ 3, 4
 [2] R. Brent and P. Zimmermann, Modern Computer Arithmetic, Cambridge
     Monographs on Applied and Computational Mathematics, vol. 18, Cam-
     bridge University Press, 2010. ↑ 3, 4
 [3] J. P. Buhler, A. K. Lenstra, and J. M. Pollard, Factoring integers with
     the number field sieve. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra Jr (eds.), The
     development of the number ﬁeld sieve, vol. 1554 of Lecture Notes in Math.,
     50–94. Springer–Verlag, 1993. ↑ 1
 [4] H. Cohen, A course in algorithmic algebraic number theory, Grad. Texts in
     Math., vol. 138, Springer–Verlag, 1993. ↑ 2, 7
 [5] J.-M. Couveignes, Computing a square root for the number field sieve. In
     A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra Jr (eds.), The development of the number
     ﬁeld sieve, vol. 1554 of Lecture Notes in Math., 95–102. Springer–Verlag,
     1993. ↑ 1, 5
 [6] A. Enge and A. V. Sutherland, Class invariants by the CRT method. In G.
     Hanrot, F. Morain, and E. Thomé (eds.), ANTS-IX, vol. 6197 of Lecture
     Notes in Comput. Sci., 142–156. Springer–Verlag, 2010. Proceedings. ↑ 9,
     15
 [7] J. von zur Gathen and J. Gerhard, Modern computer algebra, Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge, England, 1999. ↑ 12

                                         16
 [8] P. Gaudry, A. Kruppa, F. Morain, L. Muller, E. Thomé, and P. Zimmer-
     mann, cado-nfs, An Implementation of the Number Field Sieve Algorithm,
     2011. Available at http://cado-nfs.gforge.inria.fr/. Release 1.1. ↑ 2,
     9, 15
 [9] N. Howgrave-Graham and A. Joux, New generic algorithms for hard knap-
     sacks. In Henri Gilbert (ed.), EUROCRYPT, vol. 6110 of Lecture Notes in
     Comput. Sci., 235–256. Springer–Verlag, 2010. ↑ 14
[10] A. Joux, D. Naccache, and E. Thomé, When e-th roots become easier than
     factoring. In K. Kurosawa (ed.), ASIACRYPT 2007, vol. 4833 of Lecture
     Notes in Comput. Sci., 13–28. Springer–Verlag, 2008. Proceedings. ↑ 2, 7, 9
[11] T. Kleinjung, K. Aoki, J. Franke, A. K. Lenstra, E. Thomé, J. Bos, P.
     Gaudry, A. Kruppa, P. L. Montgomery, D. A. Osvik, H. te Riele, A. Tim-
     ofeev, and P. Zimmermann, Factorization of a 768-bit RSA modulus. In T.
     Rabin (ed.), CRYPTO 2010, vol. 6223 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
     333–350. Springer–Verlag, 2010. Proceedings. ↑ 2, 15
[12] H. W. Lenstra Jr and P. Stevenhagen, Chebotarëv and his density theorem,
     Math. Intelligencer 18(2) (1996), 26–37. ↑ 5
[13] C. Monico, ggnfs, A Number Field Sieve Implementation, 2004–2005. Avail-
     able at http://www.math.ttu.edu/~cmonico/software/ggnfs/. Release
     0.77. ↑ 2, 9
[14] P. L. Montgomery, Square roots of products of algebraic numbers. In W.
     Gautschi (ed.), Mathematics of Computation 1943–1993 : a Half-Century
     of Computational Mathematics, vol. 48 of Proc. Sympos. Appl. Math.,
     567–571. Amer. Math. Soc., 1994. ↑ 1, 6, 7, 17
[15] P. L. Montgomery, Square roots of products of algebraic numbers, 1997.
     Unpublished draft, signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from published version [14]. Dated
     May 16, 1997. ↑ 1, 6, 7, 9
[16] P. Q. Nguyen, A Montgomery-like square root for the number field sieve. In
     J. P. Buhler (ed.), ANTS-III, vol. 1423 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci.,
     151–168. Springer–Verlag, 1998. Proceedings. ↑ 7
[17] J. Papadopoulos, msieve, A Library for Factoring Large Integers – release
     1.50, 2004–. Available at http://www.boo.net/~jasonp. Release 1.50. ↑ 2,
     15
[18] A. V. Sutherland, Accelerating the CM method, 2012. Available at
     http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.1082. Preprint. ↑ 9




                                      17
